SECT. I.--THE BEGINNING OF HEAVEN AND EARTH.]

The names of the Deities  that were born  in the Plain of High Heaven  when the Heaven and Earth began were the Deity Master-of-the-August-Centre-of-Heaven,  next the High-August-Producing-Wondrous Deity,  next the Divine-Producing-Wondrous-Deity.  These three Deities were all Deities born alone, and hid their persons.  The names of the Deities that were born next from a thing that sprouted up like unto a reed-shoot when the earth,  young and like unto floating oil, drifted about medusa-like, were the Pleasant-Reed-Shoot-Prince-Elder Deity,  next the Heavenly-Eternally-Standing-Deity.   These two Deities were likewise born alone, and hid their persons.

The five Deities in the above list are separate Heavenly Deities.

[SECT. II.--THE SEVEN DIVINE GENERATIONS.]

The names of the Deities that were born next were the Earthly-Eternally-Standing-Deity,  next the Luxuriant-Integrating-Master-Deity.  These two Deities were likewise  Deities born alone, and hid their persons. The names of the Deities that were born next were the Deity Mud-Earth-Lord next his younger sister the Deity Mud-Earth-Lady;  next the Germ-Integrating-Deity, next his younger sister the Life-Integrating-Deity;  next the Deity Elder-of-the-Great-Place, next his younger sister the Deity Elder-Lady-of-the-Great-Place;  next the Deity Perfect-Exterior,   next his younger sister the Deity Oh-Awful-Lady;  next the Deity the Male-Who-Invites, next his younger sister the Deity the Female-Who-Invites.

From the Earthly-Eternally-Standing Deity down to the Deity the Female-Who-Invites in the previous list are what are termed the Seven Divine Generations.

(The two solitary Deities above [-mentioned] are each called one generation. Of the succeeding ten Deities each pair of deities is called a generation.)

[SECT. III.--THE ISLAND OF ONOGORO]

Hereupon all the Heavenly Deities commanded the two Deities His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites and Her Augustness  the Female-Who-Invites, ordering them to "make, consolidate, and give birth to this drifting land." Granting to them an heavenly jewelled spear,  they [thus] deigned to charge them. So the two Deities, standing upon the Floating Bridge of Heaven,  pushed  down the jewelled spear and stirred with it, whereupon, when they had stiffed the brine till it went curdle-curdle,  and drew [the spear] up, the brine that dripped down from the end of the spear was piled up and became an island. This is the Island of Onogoro.

[SECT. IV.--COURTSHIP OF THE DEITIES THE MALE-WHO-INVITES AND THE FEMALE WHO-INVITES.]

Having descended from Heaven onto this island, they saw to the erection  of an heavenly august pillar, they saw to the erection of an hall of eight fathoms.  Tunc  quaesivit [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat] a minore sorore Augusta Femina-Qui-Invitat: "Tuum corpus quo in modo factum est?" Respondit dicens: "Meum corpus crescens crevit, sed est una pars quae non crevit continua." Tunc dixit Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat: "Meum corpus crescens crevit, sed est una pars quae crevit superflua. Ergo an bonum erit ut hanc corporis mei partem quae crevit, superflua in tui corporis partem quae non crevit continua inseram, et regiones procreem?" Augusta Femina-Quae-Invitat respondit dicens: "Bonum erit." Tunc dixit Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat: "Quod

quum ita sit, ego et tu hanc coelestem augustam, columnam circumeuntes mutuoque occurrentes, augustarum [i.e. privatarum] partium augustam coitionem faciemus."  Hac pactione facta, dixit [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat]: "Tu a dextera circumeuns occurre; ego a sinistra occurram." Absoluta pactione ubi circumierunt, Augusta Femina-Qui-Invitat primum inquit: "O venuste et amabilis adolescens!" Deinde Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat inquit: "O venusta et amabilis virgo!" Postquam singuli orationi finem fecerunt, [Augustus Mas-Qui-Invitat] locutus est sorori, dicens: "Non decet feminam primum verba facere." Nihilominus in thalamo [opus procreationis] inceperunt, et filium [nomine] Hirudinem  [vel Hirudini similem] pepererunt. This child they placed in a boat of reeds, and let it float away. Next they gave birth to the Island of Aha.  This likewise is not reckoned among their children.

[SECT. V.--BIRTH OF THE EIGHT ISLANDS.]

Hereupon the two Deities took counsel, saying: "The children to whom we have now given birth are not good. It will be best to announce this in the august  place  of the Heavenly Deities." They ascended forthwith to Heaven and enquired of Their Augustnesses the Heavenly Deities. Then the Heavenly Deities commanded and found out by grand divination,  and ordered them, saying: "They were not good because the woman spoke first. Descend back again and amend your words." So thereupon descending back, they again went round the heavenly august pillar as before. Thereupon his Augustness the Male-Who-Invites spoke first: "Ah! what a fair and lovely maiden! Afterwards his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites spoke: "Ah! what a fair and lovely youth!" Tali modo quun orationi finem fecerant, auguste coierunt et pepererunt a child the Island of Ahaji, Ho-no-sa-wake.  Next they gave birth to the Island of Futa-no in Iyo.  This island has one body and four faces, and each face has a name. So the Land of Iyo is called Lovely-Princess;  the Land of Sanuki  is called Prince-Good-Boiled-Rice;  the Land of Aha is called the Princess-of-Great-Food;  the Land of Tosa  is called Brave-Good-Youth.  Next they gave birth to the Islands of Mitsu-go  near Oki,  another name for which [islands] is Heavenly-Great-Heart-Youth.

[paragraph continues] This island likewise has one body and four faces  and each face has a name. So the land of Tsukushi is called White-Sun-Youth;  the Land of Toyo  is called Luxuriant-Sun-Youth;  the Land of Hi is called Brave Sun-Confronting-Luxuriant-Wondrous-Lord-Youth;  the Land of Kumaso is called Brave-Sun-Youth.  Next they gave birth to the Island of Iki,  another name for which is Heaven's One-Pillar.  Next they gave birth to the Island of Tsu,  another name for which is Heavenly-Hand-net-Good-Princess.  Next they gave birth to the Island of Sado.  Next they gave birth to Great-Yamato-the-Luxuriant-Island-of-the-Dragon-Fly,  another name for which is Heavenly-August-Sky-Luxuriant-Dragon-fly-Lord-Youth.  The name of "Land-of -the- Eight-Great-Islands"  therefore originated in these eight islands having been born first. After that, when they had returned,  they gave birth to the Island of Ko[-shima]  in Kibi,  another name for which [island] is Brave-Sun  Direction-Youth. Next they gave birth to the Island of Adzuki,  another name for which is Oho-Nu-De-Hime. Next they gave birth to the Island of Oho [-shima],  another name for which is Oho-Tamaru-Wake. Next they gave birth to the Island of Hime,  another name for which is Heaven's-One-Root. Next they gave birth to the Island of Chika,  another name for which is Heavenly-Great-Male. Next they gave birth to the Island[s] of Futa-go,  another name for which is Heaven's-Two-Houses, (Six islands in all from the Island of Ko, in Kibi to the Island of Heaven's-Two-Houses).

[SECT. VI.--BIRTH OF THE VARIOUS DEITIES.]

When they had finished giving birth to countries, they began afresh giving birth to Deities. So the name of the Deity they gave birth to was the Deity Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing;  next they gave birth to the Deity Rock-Earth-Prince;  next they gave birth to the Deity Rock-Nest-Princess;   next they gave birth to the Deity Great-Door-Sun-Youth;  next they gave birth to the Deity Heavenly-Blowing-Male;  next they gave birth to the Deity Great-House-Prince;  next they gave birth to the Deity Youth-of-the-Wind-Breath-the-Great-Male;  next they gave birth to the Sea-Deity, whose name is the Deity Great-Ocean-Possessor;  next they gave birth to the Deity of the Water-Gates,  whose name is the Deity Prince-of-Swift-Autumn;  next they gave birth to his younger sister the Deity Princess-of-Swift-Autumn. (Ten Deities in all from the Deity-Great-Male-of-the-Great-Thing to the Deity Princess-of-Autumn.)  The names of the Deities given birth to by these two Deities Prince-of-Swift-Autumn and  Princess-of-Swift-Autumn from their separate dominions of river and sea were: the Deity Foam-Calm;   next the Deity Foam-Waves; next the Deity Bubble-Calm; next the Deity Bubble-Waves; next the Deity Heavenly-Water-Divider;  next the Deity Earthly-Water-Divider; next the Deity Heavenly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor;  next the Deity Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor. (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Foam-Prince to the Deity Earthly-Water-Drawing-Gourd-Possessor.) Next they gave birth to the Deity of Wind, whose name is the Deity Prince-of-Long-Wind.  Next they gave birth to the Deity of Trees, whose name is Deity Stem-Elder,  next

they gave birth to the Deity of Mountains, whose name is the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor.  Next they gave birth to the Deity of Moors, whose name is the Deity Thatch-Moor-Princess,  another name for whom is the Deity Moor-Elder. (Four Deities in all from the Deity Prince-of Long-Wind to Moor-Elder.) The names of the Deities given  birth to by these two Deities, the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor and the Deity Moor-Elder from their separate dominions of mountain and moor were: the Deity Heavenly-Elder-of-the-Passes; next the Deity Earthly-Elder-of-the-Passes;  next the Deity Heavenly-Pass-Boundary, next the Deity Earthly-Pass-Boundary;  next the Deity Heavenly-Dark-Door; next the Deity Earthly Dark-Door;  next the Deity Great-Vale-Prince; next the Deity Great-Vale-Princess.   (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Heavenly-Elder-of-the-Passes to the Deity Great-Vale-Princess.) The name of the Deity they  next gave birth to was the Deity Bird's-Rock-Camphor-tree-Boat,  another name for whom is the Heavenly-Bird-Boat. Next they gave birth to the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food.  Next they gave  birth to the Fire-Burning-Swift-Male-Deity,  another name for whom is the Deity Fire-Shining-Prince, and another name is the Deity Fire-Shining-Elder.

[SECT. VII.--RETIREMENT OF HER AUGUSTNESS THE PRINCESS-WHO-INVITES.]

Through giving birth to this child her august private parts were burnt, and she sickened and lay down.  The names of the Deities born from her vomit were the Deity Metal-Mountain-Prince and next the Deity Metal-Mountain-Princess.  The names of the Deities that were born from her faeces were the Deity Clay-Viscid-Prince and next the Deity Clay-Viscid-Princess.  The names of the Deities that were next born from her urine were the Deity Mitsuhanome  and next the Young-Wondrous-Producing-Deity.  The child of this Deity was called

the Deity Luxuriant-Food-Princess.  So the Deity  the Female-Who-Invites, through giving birth to the Deity-of-Fire, at length divinely retired.  (Eight Deities in all from the Heavenly-Bird-Boat to the Deity Luxuriant-Food-Princess. )

The total number of islands given birth to jointly by the two Deities the Male-Who-Invites and the Female-Who-Invites was fourteen, and of Deities thirty-five. (These are such as were given birth to before the Deity Princess-Who-Invites divinely retired. Only the Island of Onogoro, was not given birth to.  and moreover the Leech-Child  and the Island of Aha are not reckoned among the children).

So then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites said: Oh! Thine Augustness my lovely younger sister! Oh that I should have exchanged thee for this single child!"  And as he crept round her august pillow, and  as he crept round her august feet and wept, there was born from his august tears the Deity that dwells at Konomoto near Unewo on Mount Kagu,  and whose name is the Crying-Weeping-Female-Deity.  So he buried the divinely retired  Deity the Female-Who-Invites on Mount Hiba  at the boundary of the Land of Idzumo  and the Land of Hahaki.

[SECT. VIII.--THE SLAYING OF THE FIRE-DEITY.]

Then His Augustness the Male-Who-invites, drawing the ten-grasp sabre  that was augustly girded on him,  cut off the head of his child the Deity Shining-Elder. Hereupon the names of the Deities that were born from the blood that stuck to the point of the august sword

and bespattered the multitudinous rock-misses were: the Deity Rock-Splitter,  next the Deity Root-Splitter, next the Rock-Possessing-Male-Deity.  The names of the Deities that were next born from the blood that stuck to the upper part  of the august sword and again bespattered the multitudinous rock-masses were: the Awfully-Swift-Deity,  next the Fire-Swift-Deity,  next the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity,  another name for whom is the Brave-Snapping-Deity,  and another name is the Luxuriant-Snapping Deity. The names of the Deities that were next born from the blood that collected  on the hilt of the august sword and leaked out between his fingers were: the Deity Kura-okami and next the Deity Kura-mitsuha.

All the eight Deities in the above list, from the Deity Rock-Splitter to the Deity Kura-mitsuha, are Deities that were born from the august sword.

The name of the Deity that was born from the head of the Deity Shining-Elder, who had been slain was the Deity Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains.  The name of the Deity that  next born from his chest was the Deity Possessor-of-Descent-Mountains.  The name of the Deity that was next born from his belly was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Innermost-Mountains.  The name of the Deity that was next born from his private parts was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Dark-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his left hand  was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Dense[ly-Wooded]-Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his right hand  was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Outlying, Mountains. The name of the Deity that was next born from his left foot  was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Moorland-Mountains.

[paragraph continues] The name of the Deity that was next born from his right foot  was the Deity Possessor-of-the-Outer-Mountains. (Eight Deities in all from the Deity Possessor-of-the-True-Pass-Mountains to the Deity Possessor-of-the-Outer-Mountains). So the name of the sword with which [the Male-Who-Invites] cut off [his son's head] was Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended, and another name was Majestic Point-Blade-Extended.

[SECT. IX.--THE LAND OF HADES.]

Thereupon [His Augustness the Male Who-Invites], wishing to meet and see his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites, followed after her to the Land of Hades.  So when from the palace she raised the  door and came out to meet him,  His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites spoke, saying: "Thine Augustness my lovely younger sister! the lands that I and thou made are not yet finished making; so come back!" Then Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites answered, saying:

[paragraph continues] "Lamentable indeed that thou earnest not sooner! I have eaten of the furnace of Hades.  Nevertheless, as I reverence  the entry here of Thine Augustness my lovely elder brother, I wish to return.  Moreover  I will discuss it particularly with the Deities of Hades.  Look not at me!" Having thus spoken, she went back inside the palace; and as she tarried there very long, he could not wait. So having taken and broken off one of the end-teeth  of the multitudinous and close-toothed comb stuck in the august left bunch [of his hair], he lit one light  and went in and looked. Maggots were swarming. and [she was] rotting, and in her head dwelt the Great-Thunder,  in her breast dwelt the Fire-Thunder, in her left hand  dwelt the Young-Thunder, in her right hand  dwelt the Earth-Thunder, in her left foot  dwelt the Rumbling-Thunder, in her right foot  dwelt the Couchant-Thunder:--altogether eight Thunder-Deities had been born and dwelt there.  Hereupon His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites, overawed at the sight, fled back, whereupon his younger sister Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites said: "Thou hast put me to shame," and at once sent the Ugly-Female-of-Hades  to pursue him. So His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites took his black august head-dress  and cast it down, and it instantly turned into grapes. While she picked them up and ate them, he fled on; but as she still pursued him, he took and broke the multitudinous and close-toothed comb in the right bunch [of his hair] and cast it down, and it instantly turned into bamboo-sprouts. While she pulled them up and ate them, he fled on. Again later [his Younger sister] sent the eight Thunder-Deities with a thousand and five hundred warriors of Hades to pursue

him. So he, drawing the ten-grasp sabre that was augustly girded on him, fled forward brandishing it in his back hand;  and as they still pursued, he took, on reaching the base of the Even Pass of Hades,  three peaches that were growing at its base, and waited and smote [his pursuers therewith], so that they all fled back. Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites announced to the peaches: "Like as ye have helped me, so must ye help all living people  in the Central Land of Reed-Plains  when they shall fall into troublous circumstances and be harassed!"--and he gave [to the peaches] the designation of Their Augustnesses Great-Divine-Fruit.  Last of all his younger sister Her Augustness the Princess-Who-Invites came out herself in pursuit. So he drew a thousand-draught rock,  and [with it] blocked up the Even Pass of Hades, and placed the rock in the middle; and they stood opposite to one another and exchanged leave-takings;  and Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites said: "My lovely elder brother, thine Augustness! If thou do like this, I will in one day strangle to death a thousand of the folks of thy land." Then His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites replied: "My lovely younger sister, Thine Augustness! If thou do this, I will in one day set up a thousand and five hundred parturition-houses.  In this manner each day a thousand people would surely be born." So Her Augustness the Female-Who-Invites is called the Great-Deity-of-Hades.  Again it is said that, owing to her having pursued and reached [her elder brother], she is called the Road-Reaching-Great-Deity.  Again the rock with which he blocked up the Pass of Hades is called the Great-Deity-of-the-Road-Turning-back,

and again it is called the Blocking-Great-Deity-of-the-Door-of-Hades.  So what was called the Even-Pass-of-Hades is now called the Ifuya-Pass  in the Land of Idzumo.

[SECT. X.--THE PURIFICATION OF THE AUGUST PERSON.]

Therefore the Great Deity the Male-Who-Invites said: "Nay! hideous! I have come to a hideous and polluted land,--I have!  So I will perform the purification of my august person." So he went out to a plain [covered with] ahagi  at a small river-mouth near Tachibana  in Himuka  in [the island of] Tsukushi, and purified and cleansed himself. So the name of the Deity that was born from the august staff which he threw down was the Deity Thrust-Erect-Come-Not-Place.  The name of  the Deity that was born from the august girdle which he next threw down was the Deity Road-Long-Space.

[paragraph continues] The name of the Deity that was born from the august skirt which he next threw down was the Deity Loosen-Put.  The name of the Deity that was born from the august upper garment which he next threw down was the Deity Master-of-Trouble.  The name of the Deity that was born from the august trousers which he next threw down was the Road-Fork-Deity.  The name of the Deity that was born from the august hat which he next threw down was the Deity Master-of-the-Open-Mouth.  The names of the Deities that were born from the bracelet of his august left hand  which he next threw down were the Deities Offing-Distant,  next the Deity Wash-Prince-of-the-Offing, next the Deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Offing. The names of the Deities that were born from the bracelet of his august right hand  which he next threw down were: the Deity Shore-Distant, next the Deity Wash-Prince-of-the-Shore, next the Deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Shore.

The twelve Deities mentioned in the foregoing  list from the Deity Come-Not-Place down to the Deity Intermediate-Direction-of-the-Shore are Deities that were born from his taking off the things that were on his person.

Thereupon saying: "The water in the upper reach is [too] rapid; the water in the lower reach is [too] sluggish," he went down and plunged in the middle reach; and, as he washed, there was first born the Wondrous-Deity-of-Eighty-Evils, and next the Wondrous-Deity-of-Great-Evils.  These two Deities are the Deities that were born from the filth [he contracted] when he went to that polluted, hideous land.  The names of the Deities that were next born to rectify those evils were:

the Divine-Rectifying-Wondrous Deity, next the Great-Rectifying-Wondrous-Deity,  next the Female-Deity-Idzu.  The names of the Deities that were next born, as he bathed at the bottom of the water, were: the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Bottom,  and next His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom. The names of the Deities that were born as he bathed in the middle [of the water] were: the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Middle, and next His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Middle. The names of the Deities that were born as he bathed at the top of the water were the Deity Possessor-of-the-Ocean-Surface, and next His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Surface. These three Ocean-Possessing Deities are the Deities held in reverence as their ancestral Deities by the Chiefs of Adzumi.  So the Chiefs of Adzumi are the descendants of His Augustness Utsushi-hi-gana-saku,  a child of these Ocean-Possessing Deities.  These three Deities His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Bottom, His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Middle, and His Augustness Elder-Male-of-the-Surface are the three Great Deities of the Inlet of Sumi.  The name of the Deity that was born as he thereupon washed his left august eye was the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity.  The name of the Deity that was next born as he washed his right august eye was His Augustness, Moon-Night Possessor.  The name of the Deity that was next born as he washed his august nose was His Brave-Swift-impetuous-Male-Augustness.

The fourteen Deities in the foregoing list from the Wondrous-Deity-of-Eighty-Evils down to His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness are Deities born from the bathing of his august person.

[SECT. XI.--INVESTITURE OF THE THREE DEITIES; THE ILLUSTRIOUS AUGUST CHILDREN.]

At this time His Augustness the Male-Who-Invites greatly rejoiced, saying; "I, begetting child after child, have at my final begetting gotten. three illustrious children," [with which words,] at once jinglingly taking off and shaking the jewel-string  forming his august necklace, he bestowed it on the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, saying: "Do Thine Augustness rule the Plain-of-High-Heaven." With this charge he bestowed it on her. Now the name of this august necklace was the August-Store-house-Shelf-Deity.  Next he said of His Augustness Moon-Night-Possessor: "Do Thine Augustness rule the Dominion of the "Night."  Thus he charged him. Next he said to His-Brave-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "Do Thine Augustness rule the Sea-Plain."

[SECT. XII.--THE CRYING AND WEEPING OF HIS IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS.]

So while [the other two Deities] each [assumed his and her] rule according to the command with which [their father] had deigned to charge them, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness did not [assume the] rule

[paragraph continues] [of] the dominion with which he had been charged, but cried and wept till his eight-grasp beard  reached to the pit of his stomach.  The fashion of his weeping was such as by his weeping to wither the green mountains into withered mountains, and by his weeping to dry up all the rivers and seas.  For this reason the sound of bad Deities was like unto the flies in the fifth moon  as they all swarmed,  and in all things  every portent of woe arose. So the Great August Deity the Male-Who-Invites said to His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "How is it that, instead of ruling the land with which I charged thee, thou dost wail and weep?" He replied, saying: "I  wail because I wish to depart to my  deceased mother's  land, to the Nether Distant Land."  Then the Great August Deity the Male-Who-Invites was very angry and said: "If that be so, thou shall not dwell in this land,"  and forthwith expelled him with a divine expulsion. So the Great Deity the Male-Who-Invites dwells at Taga  in Afumi.

[SECT. XIII.--THE AUGUST OATH]

So thereupon His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said: "If that be so, I will take leave  of the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, and depart." [With these words] he forthwith went up to Heaven, whereupon all the mountains and rivers shook, and every land and country quaked. So the Heaven-Shining-Great-August Deity, alarmed at the noise, said: 'The reason of the ascent hither of His Augustness my elder brother  is surely no good intent.  It is only that he wishes to wrest my land from me." And she forthwith, unbinding her august hair, twisted it into august bunches; and both into the left and into the right august bunch, as likewise into her august head-dress and likewise on to  her left and her right august arm,  she twisted an augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet

[paragraph continues] [long],--of five hundred jewels,  and slinging on her back a quiver holding a thousand [arrows], and adding [thereto]  a quiver holding five hundred [arrows], she likewise took and slung at her side a mighty and high [-sounding] elbow-pad,  and brandished and stuck her bow upright so that the top  shook, and she stamped her feet into the hard ground up to her opposing thighs,  kicking away [the earth] like rotten snow,  and stood valiantly like unto a mighty man, and waiting, asked: "Wherefore ascendest thou hither?" Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: "I have no evil intent. It is only that when the Great-August-Deity [our father] spoke, deigning to enquire the cause  of my wailing and weeping, I said 'I wail because I wish to go to my deceased mother's land,'--whereupon the Great-August-Deity said: 'Thou shalt not dwell in this land,' and deigned to expel me with a divine expulsion. It is therefore solely with the thought of taking leave of thee and departing, that I have ascended hither. I have no strange intentions." Then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity said: "If that be so, whereby shall I know the sincerity of thine intentions?' Thereupon His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness replied, saying: "Let each of us swear,  and produce children." So as they then swore to each other from the opposite banks of the Tranquil River of Heaven.  the august names of the Deities that were born from the mist [of her breath] when, having first begged His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness to hand her the ten-grasp sabre which was girded on him and broken it into three fragments, and with the jewels making a jingling sound  having brandished and washed them in the True-Pool-Well of

[paragraph continues] Heaven,  and having crunchingly crunched them, the  Heaven-Shining-Great-Deity blew them away, were Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess,  another august name for whom is Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Island-of-the Offing; next Her Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess,  another august name for whom is Her Augustness Good-Princess; next Her Augustness, Princess-of-the-Torrent.  The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when, having begged the Heaven-Shining. Great-August-Deity to hand him the augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],--of five hundred jewels,--that was twisted in the left august bunch [of her hair], and with the jewels making a jingling sound having brandished and washed them in the True-Pool. Well of Heaven, and having crunchingly crunched them, His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness blew them away, was His Augustness Truly-Conquer-I-Conqueror-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears.  The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the  jewels that were twisted in the right august bunch [of her hair], and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Ame-no-hohi.  The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted in her august head-dress, and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Heaven.  The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted on her left august arm,  and having crunchingly crunched them,

he blew them away, was His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Life.  The august name of the Deity that was born from the mist [of his breath] when again, having begged her to hand him the jewels that were twisted on her right august arm,  and having crunchingly crunched them, he blew them away, was His-Wondrous-Augustness-of-Kumanu.  (Five Deities in all).

[SECT. XIV.--THE AUGUST DECLARATION OF THE DIVISION OF THE AUGUST MALE CHILDREN AND THE AUGUST FEMALE CHILDREN.]

Hereupon the Heavenly Shining-Great-August-Deity said to His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness: "As for the seed  of the five male Deities born last, their birth was from things of mine; so undoubtedly they are my children. As for the seed of the three female Deities  born first, their birth was from a thing of thine; so doubtless they are thy children." Thus did she declare the division. So Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, the Deity born first, dwells in the Inner temple of Munakata.  The next, Her Augustness Lovely-Island-Princess, dwells in the middle temple of Munakata. The next, Her Augustness Princess-of-the-Torrent, dwells in the outer temple  of Munakata. These three Deities are the three Great Deities  held in reverence by the Dukes of Munakata.  So His Augustness Brave-Rustic-Illuminator, child of His Augustness Ame-no-hohi, one of the five children born afterwards (  this is the ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Idzumo,  of the Rulers of the Land of Musashi,  of the Rulers of the Upper Land of Unakami,  of the Rulers of the Lower Land of Unakami,  of the Rulers of the Land of Izhimu,  of the Departmental Suzerains of the Island of Tsu  and of the Rulers of the Land of Tohotsu-Afumi ). The next, His Augustness Prince-Lord-of-Heaven (is the Ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Ofushi-kafuchi,  of the Chiefs of Nukatabe-no-yuwe,  of the Rulers of the Land of Ki,  of the Suzerains of Tanaka  in Yamato, of the Rulers of the Land of Yamashiro,  of the Rulers of the Land of Umaguta,  of the Rulers of the Land of Kine  in Michi-no-Shiri,  of the Rulers of the Land of Suhau,  of the Rulers of Amuchi,  in Yamato, of the Departmental Suzerains of Takechi,  of the Territorial Lords of Kamafu,  and of the Rulers of Sakikusabe ).

[SECT XV.--THE AUGUST RAVAGES OF HIS IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS]

Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity: "Owing to the sincerity of my intentions I have, in begetting children, gotten delicate females. judging from this,  I have undoubtedly gained the victory! With these words, and impetuous with victory, he broke down the divisions of the ricefields  laid out by the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, filled up the ditches, and moreover strewed  excrements  in the palace where she partook of the great food.  So, though he did thus, the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity upbraided him not,  but said: "What looks like excrements must be something that His Augustness mine elder brother has vomited through drunkenness. Again, as to his breaking down the divisions of the rice

fields and filling up the ditches, it must be because he grudges the land [they occupy ] that His Augustness mine elder brother acts thus." But notwithstanding these apologetic words, he still continued his evil acts, and was more and more [violent]. As the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity sat in her awful  weaving-hall  seeing to the weaving of, the august garments of the Deities, he broke a hole in the top  of the weaving-hall, and through it let fall a heavenly piebald horse  which he had flayed with a backward flaying,  at whose sight the women weaving the heavenly garments were so much alarmed that impegerunt privatas partes adversis radiis et obierunt.

[SECT. XVI.--THE DOOR OF THE HEAVENLY ROCK-DWELLING.]

So thereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, terrified at the sight, closed [behind her] the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling,  made it fast,  and retired. Then the whole Plain of High Heaven was obscured and all the Central Land of Reed-Plains darkened. Owing to this, eternal  night prevailed. Hereupon the voices of the myriad  Deities were like unto the flies in the fifth moon as they swarmed, and a myriad portents of woe all arose. Therefore did the eight hundred myriad  Deities assemble in a divine assembly in the bed  of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and bid the Deity Thought-Includer,  child of the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity think of a plan, assembling the long-singing birds of eternal night  and making them sing, taking the hard rocks of Heaven from the river-bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and taking the iron  from  the Heavenly Metal-Mountains,  calling in the smith Ama-tsu-ma-ra,  charging Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me

to make a mirror, and charging His Augustness jewel-Ancestor  to make an augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet [long],--of five hundred jewels, --and summoning His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord   and His Augustness Great-Jewel,  and causing them to pull out with a complete pulling the shoulder [-blade] of a true  stag from the Heavenly Mount Kagu,  and take cherrybark  from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and perform divination,  and pulling up by pulling its roots a true cleyera japonica  with five hundred [branches] from the Heavenly Mount Kagu, and taking and putting upon its upper branches the augustly complete [string] of curved jewels eight feet  [long],--of five hundred jewels,--and taking and tying to the middle branches  the mirror eight feet [long],  and taking and hanging upon its lower branches the white pacificatory offerings  and the blue pacificatory offerings, His Augustness Grand-jewel taking these divers things and holding them together with the grand august Offerings,  and His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord prayerfully reciting grand liturgies,  and the Heavenly Hand-Strength-Male-Deity  standing hidden beside the door, and Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming Female  hanging [round her] the heavenly clubmoss of the Heavenly Mount Kagu as a sash,  and making the heavenly spindle-tree her head-dress,  and binding the  leaves of the bamboo-grass of the Heavenly Mount Kagu in a posy for her hands, and laying a soundingboard  before the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, and stamping till she made it resound and doing as if possessed by a Deity,  and pulling out the nipples of her breasts, pushing down her skirt-string usque ad privates

partes.  Then the Plain of High Heaven shook, and the eight hundred myriad Deities laughed together. Hereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity was amazed, and, slightly opening the door of the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling, spoke thus from the inside: "Methought that owing to my retirement the Plain of Heaven would be dark, and likewise the Central Land of Reed-Plains would all be dark: how then is it that the Heavenly-Alarming-Female makes merry, and that likewise the eight hundred myriad Deities all laugh?" Then the Heavenly-Alarming-Female spoke saying: "We rejoice and are glad because there is a Deity more illustrious than Thine Augustness." While she was thus speaking, His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord and His Augustness Grand-jewel pushed forward the mirror and respectfully showed it to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, whereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity, more and more astonished, gradually came forth from the door and gazed upon it, whereupon the Heavenly-Hand-Strength-Male-Deity, who was standing hidden, took her august hand and drew her out, and then His Augustness Grand-jewel drew the bottom-tied rope   along at her august back, and spoke, saying: "Thou must not go back further in than this!" So when the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity had come forth, both the Plain of High Heaven and the Central-Land-of-Reed-Plains of course again became light.

[SECT. XVII.--THE AUGUST EXPULSION OF HIS-IMPETUOUS-MALE-AUGUSTNESS.]

Thereupon the eight hundred myriad Deities took counsel together, and imposed on High-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness a fine of a thousand tables,  and likewise cut his beard, and even caused the nails of his fingers and toes to be pulled out, and expelled him with a divine expulsion. Again he begged food of the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food.  Then the Princess-of-Great-Food took out all sorts of dainty things from her nose, her mouth, and her fundament, and made them up into all sorts [of dishes], which she offered to him. But His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness watched her proceedings, considered that she was offering up to him filth, and at once killed the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food. So the things that were born in the body of the Deity who had been killed were  [as follows]: in her head were born silkworms, in her two eyes were born rice-seeds, in her two ears was born millet,  in her nose were born small beans,  in her private parts was born barley,  in her fundament were born large beans.  So His Augustness the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-Ancestor  caused them to be taken and used as seeds.

[ XVIII.--THE EIGHT-FORKED SERPENT.]

So, having been expelled, [His-Swift-impetuous-Male-Augustness] descended to a place [called] Tori-kami  at the head-waters of the River Hi  in the Land of Idzumo. At this time some chopsticks  came floating down the stream. So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, thinking that there must be people at the head-waters of the river, went up it in quest of them, when he came upon an old man and an old woman,--two of them,--who had a young girl between them,  and were weeping. Then he deigned to ask: "Who are ye?" So the old man replied, saying: "I  am an Earthly Deity,  child of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor.  I am called by the name of Foot-Stroking-Elder,  my wife is called by the  name of Hand-Stroking Elder, and my daughter is called by the name of Wondrous-Inada-Princess."  Again he asked: What is the cause of your crying?" [The old man answered] saying: "I had originally eight young girls as daughters. But the eight-forked serpent of Koshi  has come every year and devoured [one], and it is now its time to come, wherefore we weep." Then he asked him: "What is its form like?" [The old man] answered, saying: "Its eyes are like akakagachi,  it has one body with eight heads and eight tails. Moreover on

its body grows moss, and also chamaecyparis  and cryptomerias. Its length extends over eight valleys and eight hills, and if one look at its belly, it is all constantly  bloody and inflamed." (What is called here akakagachi is the modern hohodzuki. ) Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness said to the old man: "If this be thy daughter, wilt thou offer her to me?" He replied, saying: "With reverence,  but I know not thine august name." Then he replied, saying: "I am elder brother  to the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. So I have now descended from Heaven." Then the Deities Foot-Stroker-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder said: "If that be so, with reverence will we offer [her to thee]." So His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness, at once taking and changing the young girl into a multitudinous and close-toothed comb which he stuck into his august hair-bunch, said to the Deities Foot-Stroking-Elder and Hand-Stroking-Elder: "Do you distill some eight-fold refined liquor.  Also make a fence round about, in that fence make eight gates, at each gate tie [together] eight platforms,  on each platform put a liquor-vat, and into each vat pour  the eight-fold refined liquor, and wait." So as they waited after having thus prepared everything in accordance with his bidding, the eight-forked serpent came truly as [the old man] had said, and immediately dipped a head into each vat, and drank the liquor. Thereupon it was intoxicated with drinking, and all [the heads] lay down and slept. Then His-Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness drew the ten-grasp sabre,  that was augustly girded on him, and cut the serpent in pieces, so that the River Hi flowed on changed into a river of blood. So when he cut the middle tail, the edge of his august sword broke. Then, thinking it

strange, he thrust into and split [the flesh] with the point of his august sword and looked, and there was a great sword [within]. So he took this great sword, and, thinking it a strange thing, he respectfully informed the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity.  This is the Herb-Quelling Great Sword.

[SECT. XIX.--THE PALACE OF SUGA.]

So thereupon His Swift-Impetuous-Male-Augustness sought in the land of Idzumo for a place where he might build a palace. Then he arrived at a place [called] Suga,  and said: "On coming to this place my august heart is pure," --and in that place he built a palace to dwell in. So that place is now called Suga.  When this Great Deity first built  the palace of Suga, clouds rose up thence. Then he made an august song.  That song said:

"Eight clouds arise. The eight-fold fence of Idzumo makes an eight-fold fence for the spouses to retire [within]. Oh! that eight-fold fence."

 Then he called the Deity Foot-Stroking-Elder and said: "Thee do I appoint Headman  of my palace;" and moreover bestowed on him the name of Master-of-the-Temple-of-Inada-Eight-Eared-Deity-of-Suga.

"Many clouds arise:
 The clouds which come forth (are) a manifold fence:
 For the husband and wife to retire within
 They have formed a manifold fence:
 Oh! that manifold fence!"

Mr. Satow's translation is as follows:

"Many clouds arise.
 The manifold fence of the forth-issuing clouds
 Makes a manifold fence
 For the spouses to be within.
 Oh! that manifold fence."

 In any case the meaning simply is that the multitudinous clouds rose up like a fence or screen behind which the newly-married deities might retire from public gaze, and Moribe suggests that the repetitions are an after-addition made to bring up to the usual number of thirty-one syllables what were originally but the three lines--

Tachi-idzuru kumo mo
        Tsuma-gome ni
 Yo-he-gahi tsukuru yo!

I.e.--

"The uprising clouds even, to shut up
        the spouses, make an eight-fold fence."

(See his discussion on this song in the "Idzu no Kotowaki Vol. I, pp. 1-3.)--The present writer has already stated in the Introduction (see <page lx>) his reasons for always rendering the native word for "eight" (ya) by "eight" instead of by "many" or "numerous," as is done by the two eminent scholars above quoted. With regard to the word Idzumo which they, in deference to the opinions of the native commentators, render by "clouds which come forth" or "forth-issuing clouds" (the Chinese characters  with which the word is written having that signification), the present writer cannot persuade himself that such a corruption as idzumo for ide-kumo either retained at the time of the composition of the song, or should now be credited with, the signification which this its supposed etymology assigns to it. The etymology moreover is far from being established, and in this, as in many other cases, the Chinese characters used to write the name of the province of Idzumo, may well have rested on nothing more than a vague similarity of sound, and probably no European scholar would endorse the opinion of the native commentators, to whom the "Records" are a sacred book, that the province of Idzumo received its name from this very poem. On the other hand, we need have no difficulty in conceding that the Pillow-Word ya-kumo-tatsu, by which Idzumo is preceded in poetical compositions, did probably here originate.--This song is in the "Chronicles" only quoted in a note, for which reason some authorities dispute its antiquity. In the note in question, we find the reading -gome (the "Records" have -gomi), the Transitive form instead of the Intransitive. If this were adopted, the translation would have to run thus: . . . . . "The eight-fold fence of Idzumo makes an eight-fold fence to shut up the spouse[s?] in;" and probably "spouse" should be understood in the Feminine to mean "wife."

[SECT. XX.--THE AUGUST ANCESTORS OF THE DEITY-MASTER-OF-THE-GREAT LAND.]

Quare, quum incepit in thalamo [opus procreationis] cum Mira-Hera-Inada, procreavit Deum nomine Eight-Island Ruler.  And again, having wedded the Divine-Princess-of-Great-Majesty,  daughter of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, he begot children: the Great-Harvest Deity  and the August-Spirit-of-Food.  The elder brother the Deity Eight-Island-Ruler wedded Princess-Falling-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees,  daughter of the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, and begot a child: the Deity Fuha-no-moji-Ku-nu-su-nu.  This Deity wedded Princess Hikaha,  daughter of the Deity Okami,  and begot a child: Water-Spoilt-Blossom-of-Fuka-buchi.  This Deity  wedded the Deity Ame-no-tsudohe-chi-ne,  and begot a child: the Deity Great-Water-Master.  This Deity wedded the Deity Grand-Ears  daughter of the Deity Funu-dzu-nu,  and begot a child: the Deity Heavenly-Brandishing-Prince-Lord.  This Deity wedded the Young-Princess-of-the-Small-Country,  daughter of the Great-Deity-of-the-Small-Country,  and begot a child: the

[paragraph continues] Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land,  another name for whom is the Deity Great-Name-Possessor,  and another name is the Deity-of-the-Reed-Plains,  and another name is the Deity of Eight-Thousand-Spears,  and another name is the Deity-Spirit-of-the-Living-Land.  In all there were five names.

[SECT. XXI.--THE WHITE HARE OF INABA.]

So this Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land had eighty Deities his brethren; but they all left the land to the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land. The reason for their leaving it was this: Each of these eighty Deities had in his heart the wish to marry the Princess of Yakami  in Inaba,  and they went together to Inaba, putting their bag on [the back of] the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, whom they took with them as an attendant. Hereupon. when they arrived at Cape Keta,  [they found] a naked hare lying down. Then the eighty Deities spoke to the hare, saying: "What thou shouldest do is to bathe in the sea-water here, and lie on the slope of a high mountain exposed to the blowing of the wind." So the hare followed the instructions of the eighty Deities, and lay down. Then, as the sea-water dried, the skin of its body all split with the blowing of the wind, so that it lay weeping with pain. But the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, who came last of all, saw the hare, and said: "Why liest thou weeping?" The hare replied, saying: "I was in the Island of Oki,  and wished to cross over to this land, but had no means of crossing over. For this reason  I deceived the crocodiles  of the sea, saying: 'Let you

and me compete, and compute the numbers of our [respective] tribes. So do you go and fetch every member of your tribe, and make them all lie in a row across from this island to Cape Keta. Then I will tread on them, and count them as I run across. Hereby shall we know whether it or my tribe is the larger.' Upon my speaking thus, they were deceived and lay down in a row, and I trod on them and counted them as I came across, and was just about to get on land, when I said: 'You have been deceived by me.' As soon as I had finished speaking, the crocodile who lay the last of all seized me and stripped off all my clothing. As I was weeping and lamenting for this reason, the eighty Deities who went by before [thee] commanded and exhorted me, saying: 'Bathe in the salt water, and lie down exposed to the wind.' So, on my doing as they had instructed me, my whole body was hurt." Thereupon the Deity Great-Name-Possessor instructed the hare, saying: "Go quickly now to the river-mouth, wash thy body with the fresh water, then take the pollen of the sedges [growing] at the river-mouth, spread it about, and roll about upon it, whereupon thy body will certainly be restored to its original state."  So [the hare] did as it was instructed, and its body became as it had been originally. This was the White Hare of Inaba.  It is now called the Hare Deity. So the hare said to the Deity Great-Name-Possessor: "These eighty Deities shall certainly not get the Princess of Yakami. Though thou bearest the bag, Thine Augustness shall obtain her."

[SECT. XXII.--MOUNT TEMA.]

Thereupon the Princess of Yakami answered  the eighty Deities, saying: "I will not listen to your words. I mean to marry the Deity Great-Name-Possessor." So  the eighty Deities, being enraged, and wishing to slay the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, took counsel together, on arriving at the foot of Tema  in the land of Hahaki, and said [to him]: "On this mountain there is a red boar. So when we drive it down, do thou wait and catch it. If thou do not wait and catch it, we will certainly slay thee." Having [thus] spoken, they took fire, and burnt a large stone like unto a boar, and rolled it down. Then, as [they] drove it down and [he] caught it,  he got stuck to and burnt by the stone, and died. Thereupon Her Augustness his august parent  cried and lamented, and went up to Heaven, and entreated His Divine-Producing-Wondrous-Augustness,  who at once sent Princess Cockle-Shell  and Prince Clam  to bring him to life. Then Princess Cockle-Shell triturated and scorched  [her shell], and Princess Clam carried water and

smeared [him] as with mother's  milk, whereupon he became a beautiful young man, and wandered off. Hereupon the eighty Deities, seeing [this], again deceived him,  taking him with them into the mountains, where they cut down a large tree, inserted a wedge in the tree,  and made him stand in the middle, whereupon they took away the wedge and tortured him to death.  Then on Her Augustness his august parent again seeking him with cries, she perceived him, and at once cleaving the tree, took him out and brought him to life, and said to him:  "If thou remain here, thou wilt at last be destroyed by the eighty Deities." Then she sent him swiftly off to the august place of the Deity Great-House-Prince  in the land of Ki.  Then when the eighty Deities searched and pursued till they came up to him, and fixed their arrows [in their bows], he escaped by clipping under the fork of a tree, and disappeared.

[SECT. XXIII.--THE NETHER-DISTANT-LAND.]

[The Deity Great-House-Prince spoke to him ] saying: "Thou must set off to the Nether-Distant-Land where  dwells His Impetuous-Mate-Augustness. That Great Deity will certainly counsel thee." So on his obeying her command and arriving at the august place  of His Impetuous-Male-Augustness, the latter's daughter the Forward-Princess  came out and saw him, and they exchanged glances and were married, and [she] went in again, and told her father, saying: "A very beautiful Deity has come." Then the Great Deity went out and looked, and said: 'This is the Ugly-Male-Deity-of-the-Reed-Plain,"  and at once calling him in, made him sleep in the snake-house. Hereupon his wife, Her Augustness the Forward-Princess, gave her husband a snake-scarf,  saying: "When the snakes are about to bite thee, drive them away by waving this scarf thrice." So, on his doing as she had instructed, the snakes became quiet, so that he came forth after calm slumbers. Again on the night of the next day [the Impetuous-Male-Deity] put him into the centipede and wasp-house;  but as she again gave him a centipede and wasp-scarf, and instructed him as before, he came forth calmly. Again [the Impetuous-Male-Deity] shot a whizzing barb  into the middle of a large moor, and sent him to fetch the arrow and, when he had entered the moor, at once set fire to the moor all round. Thereupon, while he [stood] knowing no place of exit, a mouse  came and said: "The inside is hollow-hollow; the outside is narrow-narrow."  Owing to its speaking thus, he trod on the place, where, upon he fell in and hid himself, during which time the

fire burnt past. Then the mouse brought out in its mouth and presented to him the whizzing barb. The feathers of the arrow were brought in their mouths by all the mouse's children. Hereupon his wife the Forward-Princess came bearing mourning-implements,  and crying. Her father the Great Deity, thinking that [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor] was already dead and done for, went out and stood on the moor, whereupon [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor] brought the arrow and presented it to him, upon which [the Great Deity], taking him into the house and calling him into an eight-foot spaced large room,  made him take the lice off his head. So, on looking at the head [he saw that] there were many centipedes [there]. Thereupon, as his wife gave to her husband berries of the muku tree  and red earth, he chewed the berries to pieces, and spat them out with the red earth which he held in his mouth, so that the Great Deity believed him to be chewing up and spitting out the centipedes, and, feeling fond [of him] in his heart, fell asleep. Then [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor], grasping the Great Deity's hair, tied it fast to the various rafters of the house, and, blocking up the floor of the house with a five hundred draught rock,  and taking his wife the Forward Princess on his back, then carried off  the Great Deity's great life-sword  and life-bow-and-arrows,  as also his heavenly speaking-lute,  and ran out. But the heavenly speaking-lute brushed against a tree, and the earth resounded. So the Great Deity, who was sleeping, started at the sound, and pulled down the house. But while he was disentangling his hair which was tied to the rafters, [the Deity Great-Name-Possessor] fled a long way. So then, pursuing after him to the Even Pass

of Hades,  and gazing on him from afar, he called out to the Deity Great-Name-Possessor, saying: "With the great life-sword and the life-bow-and-arrows which thou earnest, pursue thy half-brethren  till they crouch on the august slopes of the passes,  and pursue them till they are swept into the reaches of the rivers, and do thou, wretch!  become the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land;  and moreover, becoming the Deity Spirit-of-the-Living-Land, and making my daughter the Forward-Princess thy  consort,  do thou make stout the temple-pillars at the foot of Mount Uka  in the nethermost rock-bottom, and make high the cross-beams to the Plain-of-High-Heaven, and dwell [there], thou villain!"  So when, bearing the great sword and bow, he pursued and scattered the eighty Deities, he did pursue them till they crouched on the august slope of every pass,  he did pursue them till they were swept into every river, and then he began to make the land.  Quamobrem Hera Yamaki, secundum anterius pactum, [cum eo] in thalamo coivit. So he brought her with him; but, fearing his consort the Forward Princess, she stuck into the fork of a tree the child that she had borne, and went back.  So the child was called by the name of the Tree-Fork-Deity,  and another name was the Deity-of-August-Wells.

[SECT. XXIV.--THE WOOING OF THE DEITY-OF-EIGHT-THOUSAND-SPEARS.]

This Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears,  when he went forth  to woo the Princess of Nuna-kaha,  in the land of Koshi, on arriving at the house of the Princess of Nuna kaha sang, saying:

"[I] His Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears,  having been unable to find a spouse in the Land of the Eight islands, and having heard that in the far off Land of Koshi there is a wise maiden, having heard that there is a beauteous maiden, I am standing [here] to truly woo her, I am going backwards and forwards to woo her. Without having yet untied even the cord of my sword, without having yet untied even my veil, I push back the plank-door shut by the maiden; while I am standing [here], I pull it forward. While I am standing [here], the nuye sings upon the green mountain, and [the voice of] the true bird of the moor, the pheasant, resounds; the bird of the yard, the cock, crows. Oh! the pity that [the] birds should sing! Oh! these birds! Would that I could beat them till they were sick! Oh! swiftly-flying heaven-racing messenger, the tradition of the thing, too, this!"

Then the Princess of Nuna-kaha, without yet opening  the door, sang from the inside saying:--

"Thine Augustness the Deity-Of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! Being a maiden like a drooping plant, my heart is just a bird on a sand-bank by the shore; it will now indeed be a dotterel. Afterwards it will be a gentle bird; so as for thy life, do not deign to die. Oh! swiftly-flying heaven-racing messenger! the tradition of the thing, too, this!"

 [Second Song of the Princess. ]

When the sun shall hide behind the green mountains, in the night [black as] the true jewels of the moor will I come forth. Coming radiant with smiles like the morning sun, [thine] arms white as rope of paper-mulberry-bark shall softly pat [my] breast soft as the melting snow; and patting [each other] interlaced, stretching out and pillowing [ourselves] on [each other's] jewel-arms,-- true jewel-arms,--and with outstretched legs, will we sleep. So speak not too lovingly, Thine Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! The tradition of the thing, too, this!"

Quamobrem ea nocte non coierunt, sed sequentis diei nocte auguste coierunt.

[SECT. XXV.--THE CUP PLEDGE.]

 Again this Deity's Chief Empress,  Her Augustness the Forward-Princess, was very jealous. So the Deity her husband, being distressed, was about to go up from Idzumo to the Land of Yamato; and as he stood attired, with one august hand on the saddle of his august horse and one august foot in the august stirrup, he sang, saying:

"When I take and attire myself so carefully in my august garments black as the true jewels of the moor, and, like the birds of the offing, look at my breast,--though I raise my fins, [I say that] these are not good, and cast them off on the waves on the beach. When I take and attire myself so carefully in my august garments green as the kingfisher, and, like the birds of the oiling, look at my breast.--though I raise my fins, [I say that] these, too, are not good, and cast them off on the waves on the beach. When I take and attire myself so carefully in my raiment dyed in the sap of the dye-tree, the pounded madder sought in the mountain fields, and. like the birds of the offing. look at my breast,--though I raise my fins, [I say that] they are good. My dear young sister. Thine Augustness! Though thou say that thou wilt not weep,--if like the flocking birds, I flock and depart, if, like the led birds, I am led away and depart, thou wilt hang down thy head like  a single eulalia upon the mountain and thy weeping shall indeed rise as the mist of  the morning shower. Thine Augustness [my] spouse like the young herbs! The tradition of the thing, too, this!"

Then his Empress, taking a great august liquor-cup, and drawing near and offering it to him, sang, saying:--

"Oh! Thine Augustness the Deity-of-Eight-Thousand-Spears! [Thou], my [dear] Master-of-the-Great-Land indeed, being a man, probably hast on the various island-headlands  that thou seest, and on every beach headland that thou lookest on, a wife like the young herbs. But as for me alas! being a woman, I have no man except thee; I have no spouse except thee. Beneath the fluttering of the ornamented fence, beneath the softness of the warm coverlet, beneath the rustling of the cloth coverlet, [thine] arms white as rope of paper-mulberry bark softly patting [my] breast soft as the melting snow, and patting [each other] interlaced, stretching out and pillowing [our selves] on [each others arms],--true jewel arms, and with outstretched legs, will we sleep. Lift up the luxuriant august liquor!"

She having thus sung, they at once pledged [each other] by the cup with [their hands] on [each other's] necks,  and are at rest till the present time. These are called divine words.

[SECT. XXVI.--THE DEITIES THE AUGUST DESCENDANTS OF THE DEITY MASTER-OF-THE-GREAT-LAND.]

So this Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land wedded Her Augustness Torrent-Mist-Princess, the Deity dwelling in the inner temple of Munakata.  and begot children: the Deity Aji-shiki-taka-hiko-ne,  next his younger sister Her Augustness High-Princess,  another name for whom is Her Augustness Princess Under-Shining.  This Deity Aji-shiki-taka-hiko-ne is he who is now called the Great August Deity of Kamo.  Again the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land wedded Her Augustness Princess Divine-House-Shield  and begot a child: the Deity Thing-Sign-Master.  Again he wedded the Deity Bird-Ears,  daughter of the Deity Eight-Island-Possessor,  and begot

a child: the Deity Bird-Growing-Ears.  This Deity wedded Hina-teri-nakata-bichi-wo-ikochini,  and begot a child: the Deity Land-Great-Wealth.  This Deity wedded the Deity Ashi-nadaka,  another name for whom is Princess-Eight-Rivers-and-Inlets,  and begot a child: the Deity Swift-Awful-Brave-Sahaya-Land-Ruler.  This Deity wedded Princess Luck-Spirit,  daughter of the  Deity Heavenly-Awful-Master,  and begot a child: the Deity Awful-Master-Prince.  This Deity wedded Princess Hina-rashi,  daughter of the Deity Okami,  and begot a child: the Deity Tahiri-kishi-marumi.  This Deity wedded the Deity Princess-Life-Spirit-Luck-Spirit,  daughter of the Deity Waiting-to-See-the-Flowers-of-the-Holly,  and begot a child: the Deity Mira-na-mi.  This Deity wedded Princess Awo-numa-oshi,  daughter of the Master-of-Shiki-yama,  and begot a child: the Deity Nunoshi-tomi-tori-naru-mi.  This Deity wedded the Young-Day-Female-Deity,  and begot a child: the Deity Heavenly-Hibara-Great-Long-Wind-Wealth.  This Deity wedded the Deity Toho-tsu-ma-chi-ne,  daughter of the Deity Heavenly-Pass Boundary,  and begot a child: the Deity Toho-tsu-yama-zaki-tarashi.

From the above-mentioned Deity Eight-Island-Ruler down to the Deity Toho-tsu-yama-zaki-tarashi are called the Deities of seventeen generations.

SECT. XXVII.--THE LITTLE-PRINCE-THE-RENOWNED-DEITY.

So when the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land dwelt at the august cape of Miho  in Idzumo, there came riding on the crest  of the waves in a boat of heavenly Kagami  a Deity dressed in skins of geese  flayed with a complete  flaying, who, when asked his name, replied not; moreover the Deities who accompanied him, though asked, all said that they knew not. Then the toad  spoke, saying: "As for this, the Crumbling Prince  will surely know it." Thereupon [the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land] summoned and asked the Crumbling-Prince, who replied. saying: "This is the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity.  the august child of the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-Deity."  So on their then respectfully informing  His Augustness the Deity-Producing-Wondrous-August-Ancestor, he replied, saying: "This is truly my child. He among my children is the child who dipped between the fork of my hand.  So do he and thou become  brethren, and make and consolidate this land."  So from that time forward the two Deities the Great-Name-Possessor and the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity made and consolidated this land conjointly. But afterwards the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity crossed over to the Eternal Land.  So [the Deity here] called the Crumbling Prince, who revealed the Little-Prince-the-Renowned-Deity, is what is now [called] the scarecrow in the mountain fields. This Deity, though his legs do not walk, is a Deity who knows everything in the Empire.

[SECT. XXVIII.--THE AUGUST-LUCK-SPIRIT-THE-AUGUST-WONDROUS-SPIRIT.]

Thereupon the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land lamented himself, and said: "How shall I alone be able to make this land?  Together with what Deity can I make this land?" At this time there came a Deity illuminating the sea. This Deity said: "If thou wilt lay me to rest  well, I can make it together with thee. If not, the land cannot be made." Then the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land said: "If that be so, what is the manner of reverently laying thee to rest?" He replied, saying: "Reverently worship me on Yamato's green fence, the eastern mountain's top."  This is the Deity who dwells on the top of Mount Mimoro.

[SECT. XXIX.--THE AUGUST CHILDREN OF THE GREAT-HARVEST-DEITY AND OF THE SWIFT-MOUNTAIN-DEITY.]

So the Great-Harvest-Deity wedded the Princess [of?] Inu,  daughter of the Divine-Life-Producing-Wondrous-Deity,  and begot children: the Deity August-Spirit-of-the-Great-Land;   next the Deity of Kara;  next the Deity Sohori;  next the Deity White-Sun;  next the Sage-Deity.  (Five Deities ). Again he wedded the Refulgent-Princess,  and begot children: the Deity Great-Refulgent-Mountain-Dwelling-Grandee,  next the August-Harvest-Deity.  Again he wedded Princess Ame-shiru-karu-midzu,  and begot children: the Deity Oki-tsu-hiko,  next Her Augustness Oki-tsu-hime,  another name for whom is  the Deity Great Furnace-Princess --this is the Deity of the Furnace  held in reverence by all people--next the Deity Great-Mountain-Integrator,  another name for whom is the Deity-Great-Master-of-the-Mountain-End:  this Deity dwells on Mount Hiye  in the land of Chika-tsu-Afumi,  and is likewise the Deity dwelling at Matsu-no-wo  in Kadzunu,  who uses the whizzing barb.  Next the Deity-of-the-Fire-in-the-Yard;  next the Deity Asahi;  next the Deity Hahigi;  next the Deity Refulgent-Mountain-Dwelling-Grandee;  next the Deity  Swift-Mountain-Dwelling;  next the High Deity-of-the-Fire-in-the-Yard;  next the Great-Earth-Deity,  another name for whom is the Deity August-Ancestor-of-Earth.  (Nine Deities )

In the above paragraph the children of the Great-Harvest-Deity, from the Deity August-Spirit-of-the Great-Land down to the Great-Earth-Deity, are altogether sixteen Deities.

The Deity Swift-Mountain-Dwelling  wedded the Deity Princess-of-Great-Food,  and begot children: the Deity Young-Mountain-Integrator;  next the Young-Harvest-Deity;  next his younger sister the Young-Rice-Transplanting-Female-Deity;  next the Water-Sprinkling-Deity;  next the Deity-of-the-High-Sun-of-Summer,  another name for whom is the Female-Deity-of-Summer;  next the Autumn-Princess;  next the Deity Stem-Harvest;  next the Deity Lord-Stem-Tree-Young-House-Rope.

In the above paragraph the children of the Deity Swift-Mountain-Dwelling, from the Deity Young-Mountain-Integrator down to the Deity Lord-Young-House-Rope,  are altogether eight Deities.

[SECT. XXX.--THE AUGUST DELIBERATION FOR PACIFYING THE LAND.]

The Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity commanded, saying: "The Luxuriant-Reed-Plains-the-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears-of-a-Thousand-Autumns,--Of Long-Five-Hundred-Autumns  is the land which my august child His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears  shall govern." Having [thus] deigned to charge him, she sent him down from Heaven.  Hereupon His Augustness Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears, standing on the Floating Bridge of Heaven,  said: "The Luxuriant-Reed-Plains-the-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears-of-a-Thousand-Autumns,--of Long-Five-Hundred-Autumns is painfully uproarious,--it is."  With this announcement, he immediately re-ascended, and informed the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity. Then the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity  and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity commanded the eight hundred myriad Deities to assemble in a divine assembly in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven,  and caused the Deity Thought-Includer  to think [of a plan], and said:  "This Central Land of Reed-Plains is the land with which we

have deigned to charge our august child as the land which he shall govern. So as he deems that violent and savage Earthly Deities  are numerous in this land,  which Deity shall we send to subdue them?" Then the Deity Thought-Includer and likewise the eight hundred myriad Deities took counsel and said: "The Deity Ame-no-ho-hi  is the one that should be sent." So they sent the Deity Ame-no-ho-hi; but he at once curried favour with the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, and for three years brought back no report.

[SECT. XXXI.--THE HEAVENLY-YOUNG-PRINCE.]

Therefore the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity again asked all the Deities, saying. "The Deity Ame-no-ho-hi, whom we sent down to the Central Land of Reed-Plains, is long of bringing back a report.  Which Deity were it best to send on a fresh mission?"  Then the Deity Thought-Includer replied, saying: "The Heavenly-Young-Prince,  son of the Deity Heaven's-Earth-Spirit  should be sent." So they bestowed on him the Heavenly feathered arrows,  and sent him. Thereupon the Heavenly-Young-Prince, descending to that land, at once wedded Princess Under-Shining,  daughter of the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land,  and moreover, planning how he might gain [possession of] the land, for eight years brought back no  report. So then the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity again asked all the Deities, [saying]: "The Heavenly-Young-Prince is long of bringing back a report.  Which Deity shall we send on a fresh mission to enquire the cause of the Heavenly-Young-Prince's long tarrying?" Thereupon all the Deities and likewise the Deity Thought-Includer replied, saying: "The pheasant the Name-Crying-Female  should be sent," upon which [the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity and the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity] charged [the pheasant], saying: "What thou shalt go and ask the Heavenly-Young-Prince is this: 'The reason for which thou wast sent to the Central Land of Reed-Plains was to subdue and pacify the savage Deities of that land. Why for eight years bringest thou back no report?'" So then the Crying-Female,

descending from Heaven, and perching on the multitudinous [-ly-branching] cassia-tree  at the Heavenly-Young-Prince's gate, told him everything according to the mandate of the Heavenly Deities. Then the Heavenly-Spying-Woman,  having heard the bird's words, spoke to the Heavenly-Young-Prince, saying: "The sound of this bird's cry is very bad. So thou shouldest shoot it to earth." On her [thus] urging him, the Heavenly-Young-Prince at once took the heavenly vegetable wax-tree  bow and the heavenly deer-arrows bestowed on him by the Heavenly Deities, and shot the pheasant to death. Then the arrow, being shot up upside down  through the pheasant's breast, reached the august place where the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity  were sitting in the bed of the Tranquil River of Heaven. This "High-integrating-Deity" is another name for the High-August-Producing-Wondrous-Deity. So, on the High-Integrating-Deity taking up the arrow and looking at it [he saw that] there was blood adhering to the feathers of the arrow. Thereupon the High-Integrating-Deity, saying: "This arrow is the arrow that was bestowed on the Heavenly-Young-Prince," showed it to all the Deities, and said: "If this be an arrow shot at the evil Deities by the Heavenly-Young-Prince in obedience to our command, let it not hit him. If he has a foul heart, let the Heavenly-Young-Prince perish  by this arrow." With these words, the took the arrow and thrust it back down through the arrow's hole,  so that it hit the Heavenly-Young-Prince on the top of his breast  as he was sleeping on his couch, so that he died. (This is the origin of [the saying] Beware of a returning arrow. ) Moreover the pheasant returned not. So this is the

origin of the modern proverb which speaks of 'the pheasant as sole messenger.'  So the sound of the wailings of the Heavenly-Young-Prince's wife Princess Under-Shining, re-echoing in the wind, reached Heaven. So the Heavenly-Young-Prince's father, the Deity Heaven's-Earth-Spirit, and his wife and children  who were in heaven, hearing it, came down with cries and lamentations, and at once built a mourning-house there,  and made the wild goose of the river  the head-hanging bearer  the heron the broom-bearer, the kingfisher the person of the august food, the sparrow the pounding-woman,   the pheasant the weeping woman; and, having thus arranged matters, they disported themselves  for eight days and eight nights, At this time the Deity Ajishiki-taka-hiko-ne  came and condoled on the mourning for the Heavenly-Young-Prince, whereupon the Heavenly-Young-Prince's father and wife who had come down from Heaven bewailed themselves,  saying: "My child is not dead, no! My lord is not dead, no!" and with these words clung to his hands and feet, and bewailed themselves and lamented. The cause of their mistake was that the two Deities closely resembled each other in countenance: so therefore they made the mistake. Thereupon the Deity Ajishi-ki-taka-hiko-ne was very angry, and said: "It was only because he was my dear friend that I came to condole. Why should I be likened to an unclean dead person?"--and with these words he drew the ten-grasp sabre  that was augustly girded on him, and cut down the mourning-house, and kicked away [the pieces] with his feet. This was on what is called Mount Mourning  at the source of the River Awimi  in the land of Minu.  The great sword with which he cut

[paragraph continues] [the mourning-house to pieces] was called by the name of Great-Blade-Mower,  another name by which it was called being the Divine-Keen-Sabre.  So when the  Deity Aji-shiki-toba-hiko-ne flew away in his anger, his younger sister Her Augustness the High-Princess in order to reveal his august name, sang, saying:

"Oh! 'tis the Deity Aji-shiki-Taka-Hiko-Ne traversing two august valleys with the refulgence of august assembled hole-jewels, of the august assembled jewels worn round her neck by the Weaving Maiden in Heaven!"

This Song is of a Rustic Style.

[SECT. XXXII.--ABDICATION OF THE DEITY MASTER-OF-THE-GREAT-LAND.]

Hereupon the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity said: "Which Deity were it best to send on a fresh mission?"  Then the Deity Thought-Includer and likewise all the Deities said: "He who is named the Deity Majestic-Point-Blade-Extended  and dwells in the Heavenly Rock-Dwelling by the source of the Tranquil River of Heaven, is the one that should be sent: or if not this Deity, then this Deity's child, the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity,  might be sent. Moreover,  owing to this Deity Heavenly-Point-Blade-Extended having blocked up and turned back the waters of the Tranquil River of Heaven, and to his dwelling with the road blocked up, other Deities cannot go [thither]. So the Heavenly-Deer-Deity  should be sent specially to ask him." So then the Heavenly-Deer-Deity was sent to ask the Deity Heaven-Point-Blade-Extended, who replied, saying: "I will obey, and will respectfully serve you. Nevertheless on this errand  ye should send my  child, the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity," --[and with these words] immediately offered [his son to Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity]. So the Deity Heavenly-Bird-Boat  was attached to the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity, and they were sent off. Therefore these two Deities, descending to the little shore  of Inasa  in the land of Idzumo,  drew their swords ten hand-breadths long,  stuck them upside down  on the crest of a wave, seated themselves cross-legged  on the points of the swords, and asked the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, saying "The Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity

have charged us and sent us to ask, [saying]: 'We have deigned to charge our august child with thy dominion, the Central Land of Reed-Plains, as the land which he should govern. So how is thy heart?'"  He replied, saying: "I  am unable to say. My child the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master  will be the one to tell you; but he is gone to Cape Miho  to pursue birds and catch fish, and has not yet returned." So then the Deity Bird-Boat was sent to summon the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master, who, on being graciously asked, spoke to the Great Deity his father, saying: "I will obey. [Do thou]  respectfully present this land to the august child of the Heavenly Deity;"--and thereupon he trod on [the edge of] his boat so as to capsize it, clapped his heavenly departing hands in the fence of green branches, and disappeared.  So then they asked  the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land, saying: "Thy son the Deity Thing-Sign-Master has now spoken thus. Hast thou other sons who should speak?" Hereupon he spoke again, saying: "There is my other son, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm.  There is none beside him." While he was thus speaking, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm came up, bearing on the tips of his fingers a thousand-draught rock,  and said: "Who is it that has come to our land, and thus secretly talks? If that be so,  I should like to have a trial of strength. So I should like to begin by taking thine august hand." So on his letting him take his august hand, his touch at once turned it into an icicle, and again his touch turned it into a sword-blade.  So then he was frightened and drew back. Then on the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity wishing to take the hand of the Deity

[paragraph continues] Brave-August-Name-Firm, and asking permission to take it in return, he grasped and crushed it as if it were taking a young reed, and cast it aside, upon which [the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm] fled away. So when [the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity] pursuing after him, came up with him at the Sea of Suha  in the land of Shinanu,  and was about to slay him, the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm said: "I will obey. Slay me not. I will go to no other place but this, neither will I go against the command of my father the Deity Master-of-the-Great-Land. I will not go against the words of the Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master. I Will yield up this Central Land of Reed-Plains according to the command of the august child of the Heavenly Deities." So they returned again, and asked the Deity Master-of-the Great-Land [saying]: "Thy children the two Deities the Deity Thing-Sign-Master and the Deity Brave-August-Name-Firm have said that they will follow and not go against the commands of the august child of the Heavenly Deities. So how is thy heart?" Then he replied, saying: According as the two Deities my children have said, I too will not go against them. In accordance with the [heavenly] command, I will at once yield up this Central Land of Reed-Plains. But as to my place of residence, if ye will make stout the temple pillars on the nethermost rock-bottom, and make high the cross-beams to the Plain of High Heaven like the rich and perfect august nest where the august child of the Heavenly Deities rules the succession of Heaven's sun, and will deign to establish me, I will hide in the eighty (less than a hundred) road-windings, and wait on him. Again, as for my children the hundred and eighty Deities, if the

[paragraph continues] Deity Eight-Fold-Thing-Sign-Master will be the Deities, august rear and van and will respectfully serve them,  there will be no disobedient Deities."  Having thus spoken [he hid himself.  So in accordance with his word, ] they built a heavenly august abode on the shore  of Tagishi  in the land of Idzumo; and the Deity Wondrous-Eight-Spirits,  grandson of the Deity Of Water-Gates,  was made butler to offer up the heavenly august banquet, when,  having said prayers, the Deity Wondrous-Eight-Spirits turned into a cormorant, went down to the bottom of the sea, took in his mouth red earth from the bottom, made eighty heavenly platters, and, cutting sea-weed  stalks, made a fire-drill mortar, and made a fire-drill pestle out of stalks of komo,  and drilled out fire, saying: "This fire which I have drilled  will I burn until, in the Plain of High Heaven, the soot on the heavenly new lattice of the gable of His Augustness the Wondrous-Divine-Producer-the-August-Ancestor  hang down eight hand-breadths; and as for what is below the earth, I will bake down to the nethermost rock-bottom, and,--the fishing sailors, who spread their thousand-fathom ropes of paper-mulberry and angle, having with many shouts drawn in and landed the large-mouthed small-finned perch,--I will offer up the heavenly true fish-food so that the split bamboos bend."  So the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity re-ascended [to Heaven], and reported how he had subdued and pacified the Central Land of Reed-Plains.

[SECT. XXXIII.--THE AUGUST DESCENT FROM HEAVEN OF HIS AUGUSTNESS THE AUGUST GRANDCHILD.]

Then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrity-Deity  commanded and charged the Heir Apparent  His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Great-Ears

[paragraph continues] [saying: The Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity] says that he has now finished-pacifying the Central Land of Reed-Plains. So do thou, in accordance with our gracious charge, descend to and dwell in and rule over it." Then the Heir Apparent His Augustness Truly-Conqueror-I-Conquer-Conquering-Swift-Heavenly-Great-Ears replied, saying: "While I  have been getting ready to descend, there has been born [to me] a child whose name is His August ness Heaven-Plenty-Earth-Plenty-Heaven's-Sun-Height-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty.  This child should be sent down." [ As for this august child,  he was augustly  joined to Her Augustness Myriad-Looms-Luxuriant-Dragon-fly-Island-Princess,  daughter of the High-Integrating-Deity, and begot children: His Augustness-Heavenly-Rice-ear-Ruddy  and next His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty. ] Therefore, in accordance with these words, they laid their command on His Augustness Prince Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty, deigning to charge him with these words: "This Luxuriant Reed-Plain-Land-of-Fresh-Rice-ears  is the land over which thou shalt rule." So [he replied]: "I will descend from Heaven according to your commands." So when His Augustness-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty was about to descend from Heaven, there was at the eight-forking road of Heaven a Deity whose refulgence reached upwards to the Plain of High Heaven and downwards to the Central Land of  Reed-Plains. So then the Heaven-Shining-Great-August Deity and the High-Integrating Deity commanded and charged the Heavenly-Alarming-Female-Deity  [saying]: Though thou art but a delicate female, thou art a Deity who conquers in facing Deities.  So be thou the

one to go and ask thus: 'This being the road by which our august child is about to descend from Heaven, who is it that is thus there?'"  So to this gracious question he replied, saying "I  am an Earthly Deity named the Deity Prince of Saruta.  The reason for my coming here is that, having heard of the [intended] descent of the august child of the Heavenly Deities, I have come humbly to meet him and respectfully offer myself as His Augustness's vanguard."  Then joining to him His Augustness Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord, His Augustness Grand-Jewel, Her Augustness Heavenly-Alarming-Female, Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me, and His Augustness Jewel-Ancestor,  in all five chiefs of companies,  they sent him down from Heaven. Thereupon they joined to him the eight-foot [long] curved jewels and mirror that had allured [the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity from the Rock-Dwelling, ] and, also the Herb-Quelling-Great-Sword,  and likewise the Deity Thought-Includer, the Hand-Strength-Male-Deity, and the Deity Heavenly-Rock-Door-Opener  of Eternal Night,  and charged him thus: "Regard this mirror exactly as if it were our august spirit, and reverence it as if reverencing us."  Next did they say: "Let the Deity Thought-Includer take in hand our affairs, and carry on the government." These two Deities are worshipped at the temple of Isuzu.  The next, the Deity of Luxuriant-Food.  is the Deity dwelling in the outer temple of Watarahi.  The next, the Deity Heavenly-Rock-Door-Opener, another name for whom is the Wondrous-Rock-True-Gate-Deity, and another name for whom is the Luxuriant-Rock-True-Gate-Deity, --this Deity of the August Gate.  The next, the Deity Hand-Strength-Male,

dwells in Sanagata.  Now His Augustness the Heavenly-Beckoning-Ancestor-Lord (is the ancestor of the Nakatomi Chieftains);  His Augustness Grand Jewel (is the ancestor of the Imibe Headmen);  Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female (is the ancestress of the Duchesses of Saru ); Her Augustness I-shi-ko-ri-do-me (is the ancestress of the Mirror-Making Chieftains);  His Augustness-jewel-Ancestor (is the ancestor of the Jewel-Ancestor Chieftains).

[SECT. XXXIV.--THE AUGUST REIGN IN HIMUKA OF HIS AUGUSTNESS PRINCE RICE-EAR-RUDDY-PLENTY.]

So then [the Heaven-Shining-Great-August-Deity and the High-Integrating-Deity] commanded  His Augustness Heaven's-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty; and he, leaving the Heavenly Rock-Seat,  pushing asunder the eight-fold heavenly spreading clouds, and dividing a road with a mighty road-dividing, set off floating shut up in the Floating Bridge of Heaven,  and descended from Heaven onto the peak of Kuzhifuru which is Takachiho in Tsu-kushi.   So His Heavenly Great Wondrous Augustness  and His Augustness Heaven's-Round-Eyes,  both  taking on their backs the Heavenly rock-quivers,  taking at their side the large mallet-headed swords,  taking in their hands the Heavenly vegetable-wax-tree bow,  and clasping under their arms the Heavenly true deer-arrows, stood in his august van in respectful attendance. So His Heavenly-Great-Wondrous-Augustness  (is the ancestor of the Kume Lords)  Thereupon he said: "This place is opposite to the "land of Kara."  One comes straight across to the august Cape of Kasasa;  and it is a land whereon  the morning sun shines straight, a land which the evening sun's sunlight illumines. So this place is an exceedingly good place."  Having thus spoken, he made stout the

temple-pillars on the nethermost rock-bottom, and made high the cross-beams to the Plain of High Heaven,  and dwelt there.

[SECT. XXXV.--THE DUCHESS OF SARU.]

So then he charged Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female [saying]: "Do thou, who wast the one to make known this Great Deity Prince of Saruta who respectfully served as my august vanguard,  respectfully escort him [back]; and do thou likewise bear the august name of that Deity, and respectfully serve me." Wherefore the Duchesses of Saru bear the name of the Male Deity the Prince of Saruta, and the women are Duchesses of Saru.

[SECT. XXXVI.--THE DEITY PRINCE OF SARUTA AT AZAKA.]

Now when this Deity Prince of Saruta dwelt at Azaka,  he went out fishing, and had his hand caught by a hirabu shell-fish,  and was drowned in the brine of the sea. So the name by which he was called when he sank to the bottom was the Bottom-Touching-August-Spirit;  the name by which he was called when the sea-water gurgled up was the Gurgling-up-August-Spirit;  the name by which he was called when the bubbles formed was the Bubble-Bursting-August-Spirit.  Thereupon [Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female], having escorted [back] the Deity Prince of Saruta, came back,  and at once drove together all the things broad of fin and the things narrow of fin,  and asked them, saying: "Will ye respectfully serve the august son of the "Heavenly Deities? "--upon which all the fishes declared that they would respectfully serve him. Only the beche-de-mer said nothing. Then Her Augustness the Heavenly-Alarming-Female spoke to the beche-de-mer, saying: "Ah! this mouth is a mouth that gives no reply!"--and [with these words] slit the mouth with her stiletto.  So at the present day the  beche-de-mer has a slit mouth. Wherefore [from august reign to] august reign, when the offerings of the first-fruits of Shima  are presented [to the Emperor], a portion of them is granted to the Duchesses of Saru.

[SECT. XXXVII.--THE CURSE OF THE DEITY GREAT-MOUNTAIN-POSSESSOR.]

Hereupon His Augustness Heaven's-Sun-Height-Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty met a beautiful person at the august cape of Kasasa, and asked her whose daughter she was. She replied, saying: "I am a daughter of the Deity-Great-Mountain-Possessor,  and my name is the Divine-Princess-of-Ata,  another name by which I am called being Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees."  Again he asked: "Hast thou

any brethren?"  She replied, saying: "There is my elder sister, Princess-Long-as-the-Rocks."  Then he charged her, [saying]: "Ego sum cupidus coiendi tecum. Tibi quomodo videtur?" She replied, saying: "I  am not able to say. My father the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor will say." So he sent a request [for her] to her father the Deity Great-Mountain-Possessor, who, greatly delighted, respectfully sent her off, joining to her her  elder sister Princess Long-as-the-Rocks, and causing merchandise to be carried on tables holding an hundred.  So then, owing to the elder sister being very hideous, [His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty] was alarmed at the sight of her, and sent her back, only keeping the younger sister Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, whom he wedded for one night. Then the Deity-Great-Mountain-Possessor was covered with shame at Princess Long-as-the-Rocks being sent back, and sent a message [to His Augustness Prince-Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty], saying: "My reason for respectfully presenting both my daughters together was that, by sending Princess-Long-as-the-Rocks, the august offspring  of the Heavenly Deity,  though the snow  fall and the wind blow, might live eternally immovable like unto the enduring rocks, and again that by sending Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, [they] might live flourishingly like unto the flowering of the blossoms of the trees: to insure this,  I offered  them. But owing to thy thus sending back  Princess Long-as-the-Rocks, and keeping only Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees, the august offspring of the Heavenly Deity shall be but as frail  as the flowers of the trees. So it is for this

reason that down to the present day the august lives of Their Augustnesses the Heavenly Sovereigns  are not long.

[SECT. XXXVIII.--THE AUGUST CHILD-BEARING OF PRINCESS-BLOSSOMING BRILLIANTLY-LIKE-THE-FLOWERS-OF-THE-TREES.]

So later on Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly-Like-the-Flowers-of-the-Trees waited on  [His Augustness Prince Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty, and said: "I  am pregnant, and now the time for my delivery approaches. "It is not fit for me to be delivered of the august offspring of Heaven privately;  so I tell thee." Then [His Augustness Prince Rice-ear-Ruddy-Plenty] said: "Princess-Blossoming-Brilliantly!  what! pregnant after one night!  It cannot be my child. It must surely be the child of an Earthly Deity."  Then she replied, saying: "If the child with  which I am pregnant be the child of an Earthly Deity,

my delivery will not be fortunate. If it be the august child of the Heavenly Deity,  it will be fortunate;"--and thereupon she built a hall eight fathoms [long] without doors,  went inside the hall and plastered up [the entrance] with earth; and when the time came for her delivery, she set fire to the hall and was delivered.  So the name of the child that was born when the fire was burning most fiercely was His Augustness Fire-Shine  (this is the ancestor of the Hayabito, Dukes of Ata);  the name of the child born next was His Augustness Fire-Climax;  the august  name of the child born next was His Augustness  Fire-Subside,  another name for whom is His Augustness Heaven's-Sun-Height-Prince-Great-Rice-ears-Lord-Ears  (three Deities in all).

[SECT. XXXIX.--THE AUGUST EXCHANGE OF LUCK.]

So His Augustness Fire-Shine was a prince who got his luck  on the sea, and caught things broad of fin and things narrow of fin. His Augustness Fire-Subside was a prince who got his luck on the mountains, and caught things rough of hair and things soft of hair. Then His Augustness Fire-Subside said to his elder brother His Augustness Fire-Shine: "Let us mutually exchange,

and use each other's luck." [Nevertheless], though he thrice made the request, [his elder brother] would not accede [to it]; but at last with difficulty the mutual exchange was obtained. Then His Augustness Fire-Subside, undertaking the sea-luck, angled for fish, but never got a single fish; and moreover he lost the fish-hook in the sea. Thereupon his elder brother His Augustness Fire-Shine asked him for the fish-hook, saying: "A mountain-luck is a luck of its own, and a sea-luck is a luck of its own. Let each of us now restore [to the other] his luck."  To which the younger brother His Augustness Fire-Subside replied, saying: "As for thy fish-hook, I did not get a single fish by angling with it; and at last I lost it in the sea." But the elder brother required it of him [the more] urgently. So the younger brother, breaking his ten grasp sabre  that was augustly girded  on him, made [of the fragments] five hundred fish-hooks as compensation; but he would not take them. Again he made a thousand fish-hooks as compensation; but he would not receive them, saying: "I still want the real original fish-hook."

[SECT. XL.--THE PALACE OF THE OCEAN-POSSESSOR.]

Hereupon, as the younger brother was weeping and lamenting by the sea-shore, the Deity Salt-Possessor  came and asked him, saying: "What is the cause of the Sky's-Sun-Height's  weeping and lamentation? "He replied, saying: "I had exchanged a fish-hook with my elder brother,  and have lost that fish-hook; and as he asks me for it, I have given him many fish-hooks as compensation; but he will not receive them, saying, 'I  still want the original fish-hook.' So I weep and lament for this." Then the Deity Salt-Possessor said: "I will give good counsel to Thine Augustness;"--and there-with built a stout little boat without interstices,  and set him in the boat, and instructed him, saying: "When I shall have pushed the boat off, go on for some time. There will be a savoury august road;  and if thou goest in the boat along that road, there will appear a palace built like fishes' scales,--which is the palace of the Deity, Ocean-Possessor.  When thou reachest the august gate of that deity['s palace], there will be a multitudinous[-ly branching] cassia-tree  above the well at its side. So if thou sit on the top of that tree, the Sea-Deity's daughter will see thee, and counsel thee." So following [these] instructions, [His Augustness Fire-Subside] went a little [way], and everything happened as [the Deity Salt-Possessor] had said; and he forthwith climbed the cassia-tree, and sat [there]. Then when the hand-maidens of the Sea-Deity's daughter Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess,  bearing jewelled vessels, were about to draw water, there was a light in the well.  On looking up, there was a beautiful young man. They thought it very strange.

[paragraph continues] Then His Augustness Fire-Subside saw the handmaidens, and begged to be given some water. The handmaidens at once drew some water, put it into a jewelled vessel, and respectfully presented it to him. Then, without drinking the water, he loosened the jewel at his august neck, took it in his mouth, and spat it into the jewelled vessel. Thereupon the jewel adhered to the vessel, and the handmaidens could not separate the jewel [from the vessel]. So they took it with the jewel adhering to it, and presented it to Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess. Then, seeing the jewel, she asked her hand-maidens, saying: "Is there perhaps some one outside the gate?" They replied, saying: "There is some one sitting on the top of the cassia-tree above our well. It is a very beautiful young man. He is more illustrious even than our king. Lo, as he begged for water, we respectfully gave him water; but, without drinking the water, he spat this jewel into [the vessel]. As we were not able to separate this [from the other],  we have brought [the vessel] with [the jewel] in it to present to thee." Then Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess, thinking it strange, went out to look, and was forthwith delighted at the sight. They exchanged glances, after which she spoke to her father, saying: "There is a beautiful person at our gate." Then the Sea-Deity him-self went out to look, and saying: "This person is the Sky's-Sun-Height, the august child of the Heaven's-Sun-Height,"  led him into the interior [of the palace], and spreading eight layers of rugs of sea-asses  skins, and spreading on the top other eight layers of silk rugs, and setting him on the top of them, arranged merchandise on tables holding an hundred,  made an august banquet,

and forthwith gave him his daughter Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess in marriage. So he dwelt in that land for three years. Hereupon His Augustness Fire-Subside  thought of what had gone before,  and heaved one  deep sigh. So Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess, hearing the sigh, informed her father, saying: "Though he has dwelt three years [with us], he had never sighed; but this night he heaved one deep sigh. What may be the cause of it?" The Great Deity her father asked his son-in-law saying: "This morning I heard my daughter speak, saying: 'Though he has dwelt three years [with us], he had never sighed; but this night he heaved one deep sigh.' What may the cause be? Moreover what was the cause of thy coming here?" Then [His Augustness Fire-Subside] told the Great Deity exactly how his elder brother had pressed him for the lost fish-hook. Thereupon the Sea-Deity summoned together all the fishes of the sea, great and small, and asked them, saying: "Is there perchance any fish that has taken this fish-hook?" So all the fishes replied: "Lately the tahi  has complained of something sticking in its throat  preventing it from eating; so it doubtless has taken [the hook]." On the throat of the tahi being thereupon examined, there was the fish-hook [in it]. Being forthwith taken, it was washed and respectfully presented to His Augustness Fire-Subside, whom the Deity Great-Ocean-Possessor then instructed, saying: "What thou shalt say when thou grantest this fish-hook to thine elder brother [is as follows]: 'This fish-hook is a big hook, an eager hook, a poor hook, a silly hook.'  Having [thus] spoken, bestow it with thy back hand.   Having done thus,--if thine elder brother make high

fields,  do Thine Augustness make low fields; and if thine elder brother make low fields, do Thine Augustness make high fields. If thou do thus, thine elder brother will certainly be impoverished in the space of three years, owing to my ruling the water. If thine elder brother, incensed at thy doing thus, should attack thee, put forth the tide-flowing jewel  to drown him. If he express grief, put forth the tide-ebbing jewel to let him live. Thus shalt thou harass him." With these words, [the Sea-Deity] gave [to His Augustness Fire-Subside] the tide-flowing jewel and the tide-ebbing jewel,--two in all,--and forthwith summoned together all the crocodiles,  and asked them, saying: "The Sky's-Sun-Height, august child of the Heaven's-Sun-Height, is now about to proceed out to the Upper-Land.  Who will in how many days respectfully escort him, and bring back a report?"  So each according to the length of his body in fathoms spoke, fixing [a certain number of] days,--one of them, a crocodile one fathom [long], saying: "I  will escort him, and come back in one day." So then [the Sea-Deity]  said to the crocodile one fathom [long]: "If that be so, do thou respectfully escort him. While crossing the middle of the sea, do not alarm him!"  Forthwith he seated him upon the crocodile's head, and saw him off. So [the crocodile] respectfully escorted him home in one day, as he had promised. When the crocodile was about to return, [His Augustness Fire-Subside] untied the stiletto  which was girded on him, and, setting it on the crocodile's neck,  sent [the latter] back. So the crocodile one fathom [long] is now called the Deity Blade-Possessor.

[SECT. XLI.--SUBMISSION OF HIS AUGUSTNESS FIRE-SHINE.]

Hereupon [His Augustness Fire-Subside] gave the fish-hook [to his elder brother], exactly according to the Sea-Deity's words of instruction. So thenceforward [the elder brother] became poorer, and poorer, and, with renewed savage intentions, came to attack him. When he was about to attack [His Augustness Fire-Subside, the latter] put forth the tide-flowing jewel to drown him; on

his expressing grief, he put forth the tide-ebbing jewel to save him. When he had thus been harassed, he bowed his head, [*1a] saying: "I [*2a] henceforward will be Thine Augustness's guard by day and night, and respectfully serve thee." So down to the present day his various posturings when drowning are ceaselessly served up. [*3a]

SECT. XLII.--THE PARTURITION-HOUSE OF CORMORANTS' FEATHERS]

Hereupon the Sea-Deity's daughter Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess herself waited on [*1b] [His Augustness Fire-Subside], and said: "I [*2b] am already with child, and the time for my delivery now approaches. But me-thought that the august child of an Heavenly Deity [*3b] ought not to be born in the Sea-Plain.  So I have waited on thee here."  Then forthwith on the limit of the waves upon the sea-shore she built a parturition-hall,  using

cormorants' feathers for thatch. Hereupon, before the thatch was completed,  she was unable to restrain the urgency of her august womb. So she entered the parturition-hall. Then, when she was about to be delivered, she spoke to her husband  [saying]: "Whenever a foreigner is about to be delivered, she takes the shape of her native land to be delivered.  So I now will take my native shape to be delivered. Pray look not upon  me!" Hereupon [His Augustness Fire-Subside], thinking these words strange, stealthily peeped at the very moment of delivery, when she turned into a crocodile  eight fathoms [long], and crawled and writhed about; and he forthwith, terrified at the sight, fled away. Then Her Augustness Luxuriant-Jewel-Princess knew that he had peeped; and she felt ashamed, and, straightway leaving the august child which she had borne, she said: 'I had wished always to come and go across the sea-path.  But thy having peeped at my [real] shape [makes me] very shame-faced," --and she forthwith closed the sea-boundary,  and went down again.  Therefore the name by which the august child whom she had borne was called was his Augustness Heaven's-Sun-Height-Prince-Wave-limit-Brave-Cormorant-Thatch-Meeting-Incompletely.  Nevertheless afterwards, although angry at his having wished to peep, she could not restrain her loving heart, and she entrusted to her younger sister Jewel-Good-Princess,  on the occasion of her nursing the august child,  a Song to be presented [to His  Augustness Fire-Subside]. The Song said:

"As for red jewels, though even the string [they are strung on] shines, the aspect of [my] lord [who is] like unto white jewels is [more] illustrious."

Then her husband replied by a Song, which said:

"As for my younger sister, whom I took to sleep [with me] on the island where light the wild-duck, the birds of the offing, I shall not forget her till the end of my life."

So His Augustness-Prince-Great-Rice-ears-Lord-Ears  dwelt in the palace of Takachiho for five hundred and eighty years  His august mausoleum  is likewise on the west of Mount Takachiho.

[SECT. XLIII.--THE AUGUST CHILDREN OF HIS AUGUSTNESS CORMORANT-THATCH-MEETING-INCOMPLETELY]

His Augustness Heaven's-Sun-Height-Prince-Wave-limit-Brave-Cormorant-Thatch-Meeting-Incompletely wedded his maternal aunt Her Augustness Jewel-Good-Princess, and begot august children named: His Augustness Five-Reaches;  next His Augustness Boiled-Rice;  next His Augustness August-Food-Master;  next His Augustness Young-August-Food-Master,  another name for whom is His Augustness Luxuriant-August-Food-Master,  and another name is His Augustness Divine-Yamato-Ihare-Prince.  So His Augustness August-Food-Master, treading on the crest of the waves, crossed over to the Eternal Land.  His Augustness Boiled-Rice went into the Sea-Plain, it being his deceased mother's  land.

VOL. II.

[SECT. XLIV.--REIGN OF THE EMPEROR JIM-MU  (PART I.--HIS PROGRESS EASTWARD, AND DEATH OF HIS ELDER BROTHER)]

The two Deities His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko  and his elder brother His Augustness Itsu-se, dwelling in the palace of Takachiho.  took counsel, saying: "By dwelling in what place shall we [most] quietly carry on the government of the Empire?  It were probably best to go east." Forthwith they left Himuka  on their progress  to Tsukushi.  So when they arrived at Usa  in the Land of Toyo,  two of the natives, whose names were Usa-tsu-hiko and Usa-tsu-hime  built a

palace raised on one foot,  and offered them a great august banquet. Removing thence, they dwelt for one  year at the palace of Wokoda  in Tsukushi. Again making a progress up  from that land, they dwelt seven years at the palace of Takeri  in the land of Agi.  Again removing, and making a progress up from that land, they dwelt eight years at the palace of Takashima  in Kibi.  So when they made their progress up from that land, they met in the Hayasuhi  Channel a person riding towards them on the carapace of a tortoise, and raising his wings  as he angled. Then they called to him to approach, and asked him, saying: "Who art thou?" He replied, saying: "I  am an Earthly Deity. " Again they asked him, saying: "Knowest thou the sea-path?" He replied, saying: "I know it well." Again they asked him, saying: "Wilt thou follow and respectfully serve us?" He replied, saying: "I will respectfully serve you." So they pushed a pole  across to him, drew him into the august vessel, and forthwith conferred  on him the designation of Sawa-ne-tsu-hiko  (This is the ancestor of the Rulers of the land of Yamato.)  So when they went up from that land they passed the Namihaya  Crossing, and brought up at the haven of Shirakata.  At this time Nagasune-biko  of Tomi  raised an army, and waited to go out to fight [against them]. Then they took the shields that had been put in the august vessel, and disembarked. So they called that place by the name of Tate-dzu.  It is what is now called the Tadetsu of Kusaka.  Therefore when fighting with the Prince of Tomi,  His Augustness Itsu-se was pierced in his august hand by the Prince of Tomi's hurtful arrow.  So then he said: "It is not right for me, an august

child of the Sun-Deity, to fight facing the sun. It is for this reason that I am stricken by the wretched villain's  hurtful hand. I will henceforward turn round, and smite him with my back to the sun." Having [thus] decided, he, on making a progress round from the southern side, reached the sea of Chinu,  and washed the blood on his august hand: so it is called the sea of Chinu.  Making a progress round from thence, and arriving at the river-mouth of Wo  in the land of Ki,  he said: "Ah! that I should die stricken by the wretched villain's hand!" and expired  as a valiant man.  So that river-mouth was called the river mouth of Wo.  The Mausoleum, too, is on Mount Kama  in the land of Ki.

[SECT. XLV.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART II.--THE CROSS-SWORD SENT DOWN FROM HEAVEN).]

So when His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko made a progress round from thence, and reached the village of Kumanu,  a large bear came out of the mountain,  and forthwith disappeared into it. Then His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko suddenly fainted away, and his august army likewise all fainted and fell prostrate. At this time Takakurazhi  (this is the name of a person)  of Kumanu came bearing one cross-sword  to the place where the august-child of the Deity was lying prostrate, and presented it to him, upon which the august child of the Heavenly Deity forthwith rose up, and said: "How long I have slept!" So when he accepted the cross-sword, the savage Deities of the mountains of Kumanu all spontaneously fell cut down.  Then the whole august

army, that had been bewildered and had fallen prostrate, awoke and rose up. So the august child of the Heavenly Deity asked him how he had got the cross-sword. Takakurazhi  replied, saying: "I was told in a dream that

the two Deities the Heaven-Shining-Great-Deity  and the High Integrating Deity  commanded and summoned the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity,  and charged him [thus]: 'The Central Land of Reed-Plains  is painfully uproarious,--it is.  Our august children must be ill at ease. As [therefore] the Central Land of Reed-Plains is a land which thou specially subduedst, thou the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity shalt descend [thither].' Then he replied, saying: 'I  will not descend [myself], but I have the cross-sword wherewith I specially subdued the land. (The name by which this sword is called is the Deity Thrust-Snap;  another name by which it is called is the Deity Awful-Snap,  and another name for it is the August-Snap-Spirit,  This sword dwells in the temple of the Deity of Isonokami)  The manner in which I will send this sword down will be to perforate the ridge of [the roof of] Takakurazhi's stone-house,  and drop it through. (So the Brave-Awful-Possessing-Male-Deity instructed me, saying: 'I will perforate the ridge of [the roof of] thy store-house, and drop this sword through. ) So do thou, with the good eyes of  morning,  take it and present it to the august child of the Heavenly Deity.' So, on my searching my store-house early next morning in accordance with the instructions of the dream, there really was a cross-sword there. So I just present this cross-sword to thee."

[SECT. XLVI.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART III.--THE GIGANTIC CROW AND GODS WITH TAILS)]

"Then His  Augustness the Great-High-Integrating-Deity again commanded and taught, saying: "August son of the Heavenly Deity! make no progress hence into the interior. The savage Deities are very numerous. I will now send from Heaven a crow eight feet [long].  So that crow eight feet [long] shall guide thee. Thou must make thy progress following after it as it goes." So on [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] making his progress following after the crow eight feet [long] in obedience to the Deity's instructions, he reached the lower course of the Yeshinu  river, where there was a  person catching fish in a weir.  Then the august child of the Heavenly Deity asked, saying: "Who art thou?" He replied, saying: "I  am an Earthly Deity  and am called by the name of Nihe-motsu no Ko."  (This is the ancestor of the Cormorant-Keepers of Aha.)  On [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] making his progress thence, a person with a tail  came out of a well. The well shone. Then [His Augustness] asked: "Who art thou?" He

replied, saying: "I am an Earthly Deity, and my name is Wi-hika."  This is the ancestor of the Headmen of Yeshinu).  On his forthwith entering the mountains,  His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko again met a person with a tail. This person came forth pushing the cliffs apart. Then [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] asked: "Who art thou?" He replied, saying; "I am an Earthly Deity, and my name is Iha-oshi-waku no Ko. I heard [just] now that the august son of the Heavenly Deity was making his progress. So it is for that that I have come to meet thee." (This is the ancestor of the Territorial  Owners of Yeshinu).  Thence [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] penetrated over on foot to Uda.  So they say: "The Ugachi of Uda."

[SECT. XLVII.--EMPEROR JIM-MU ( IV.--THE UKASHI BRETHREN).]

So then there were in Uda two persons, Ukashi the Elder Brother and Ukashi the Younger Brother.  So

[paragraph continues] [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] sent the crow eight feet [long] in advance to ask these persons, saying: "The august child of the Heavenly Deity has made a progress [hither]. Will ye respectfully serve him?" Hereupon Ukashi the Elder Brother waited for and shot at the messenger with a whizzing barb to make him turn back. So the place where the whizzing barb fell is called Kabura-zaki.  Saying that he intended to wait for and smite [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], he [tried to] collect an army. But being unable to collect an army he said deceitfully that he would respectfully serve [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], and built a great palace,  and in that palace set a pitfall, and waited. Then Ukashi the Younger Brother came out to  [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] beforehand, and made obeisance, saying: "Mine  elder brother Ukashi the Elder Brother has shot at and turned back the messenger  of the august child of the Heavenly Deity, and, intending to wait for and attack thee, has [tried to] collect an army; but, being unable to collect it, he has built a great palace, and set  a gin within it, intending to wait for and catch thee. So I have come out to inform [thee of this]." Then the two persons His Augustness Michi-no-Omi,  ancestor of the Ohotomo Chieftains,  and His Augustness Ohokume,  ancestor of the Kume Lords,  summoned Ukashi the Elder Brother and reviled him, saying: "Into the great palace which thou  hast built to respectfully serve [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko], be thou  the first to enter, and declare plainly the manner in which thou intendest respectfully to serve him; "--and forthwith grasping the hilts of their cross-swords, playing with their spears,  and fixing arrows [in

their bows], they drove him in, whereupon he was caught in  the gin which he himself had set, and died. So they forthwith pulled him out, and cut him in pieces. So the place is called Uda-no-Chihara.  Having done thus, [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] bestowed on his august army the whole of the great banquet presented [to him] by Ukashi the Younger Brother. At this time he sang, saying:

"The woodcock, for which I laid a wood-cock-snare  and waited in the high castle of Uda, strikes not against it; but a valiant whale strikes against it. If the elder wife ask for fish, slice off a little like the berries of the stand soba; if the younger wife ask for fish, slice off a quantity like the berries of the vigorous sasaki."

"Ugh!  pfui! dolt! This is saying thou rascal. Ah! pfui! dolt! This is laughing  [him] to scorn."

So Ukashi the Younger Brother (he is the ancestor of the Water Directors of Uda).

[SECT. XLVIII.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART V.--THE EARTH-SPIDER OF THE CAVE OF OSAKA).]

When [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] made his progress, and reached the great cave of Osaka,  earth-spiders  with tails, [namely] eighty bravoes,  were in the cave awaiting him. So then the august son of the Heavenly Deity commanded that a banquet be bestowed on the eighty bravoes. Thereupon he set eighty butlers, one for each of the eighty bravoes, and girded each of them with a sword, and instructed the butlers, saying:  "When ye hear me sing, cut [them down] simultaneously." So the Song by which he made clear to them to set about smiting the earth-spiders said:

"Into the great cave  Osaka people have entered in abundance, and are  [there]. Though people have entered in abundance, and are [there], the children of the augustly powerful warriors will smite and finish them with [their] mallet-headed [swords], [their] stone-mallet [swords]: the children of the augustly powerful warriors, with [their] mallet-headed [swords], [their] stone-mallet [swords], would now do well to smite."

Having thus sung, they drew their swords, and simultaneously smote them to death.

[SECT. XLIX.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART. VI.--THE PRINCE OF TOMI AND THE SHIKI BRETHREN)]

After this, when about to smite the Prince of Tomi,  he sang, saying:

"The children of the augustly powerful army will smite and finish the one stem of smelly chive in the millet-field,--the stem of its root, both its root and shoots."

Again he sang:

"The ginger, which the children of the augustly powerful army planted near the hedge, resounds in the mouth. I shall not forget it. I will smite and finish it."

 Again he sang, saying:

"Like the turbinidae creeping round the great rock in the sea of Ise [on which blows] the divine wind, [so] will we creep round, and smite and finish them."

Again when he smote Shiki the Elder Brother and Shiki the Younger Brother,  the august army was temporarily exhausted. Then he sang, saying:

"As we fight placing our shields in a row, going and watching from between the trees on Mount Inasa, oh! we are famished. Ye keepers of cormorants, the birds of the island, come now to our rescue!"

[SECT. L.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART VII.--THE EMPIRE PACIFIED)]

So then His Augustness Nigi-hayabi  waited on and said to the august child of the Heavenly Deity: "As I heard that [thou], the august child of the Heavenly Deity, hadst descended from Heaven, I have followed

down to wait on thee." Forthwith presenting to him the heavenly symbols,  he respectfully served him. So His Augustness Nigi-hayabi wedded the Princess of Tomi,   sister of the Prince of Tomi, and begot a child, His Augustness Umashi-ma-ji.  (He was the ancestor of the Chiefs of the Warrior-Clan,  of the Grandees of Hodzumi;  and of the Grandees of the Neck-Clan).  So having thus subdued and pacified the savage Deities, and extirpated the unsubmissive people, [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] dwelt at the palace of Kashibara  near Unebi  and ruled the Empire.

[SECT. LI.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART. VIII.--HE WEDS ).]

So when he dwelt in Himuka, [His Augustness Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko] wedded  Princess Ahira,  younger sister of the Duke of Wobashi  in Ata,  and begot children:  there were two, --His Augustness Tagishi-mimi,  next His Augustness Kisu-mimi.  But when he sought for a beautiful maiden to make her his Chief Empress,  His Augustness Oho-kume said: "There is here a beauteous maiden who is called the august child of a Deity. The reason why she is called the august child of a Deity is that the Princess Seya-datara,  daughter of Mizokuhi  of Mishima,  was admired on account of her beauty by the Great-Master-of-Things the Deity of Miwa,  qui, quum pulchra puella oletum fecit, in sagittam rubro [colore] fucatam se convertit, et ab inferiori parte cloacae [ad usum] faciendi oleti virginis privatas partes transfixit. Tunc pulchra virgo consternata est, et surrexit, et trepide fugit. Statim sagittam attulit, et juxta thalamum posuit. Subito [sagitta] formosus adolescens facta  est, qui cito pulchram puellam sibi in matrimonio junxit, et filiam procreavit nomine Hoto-tarara-i-susugi-hime;  et est nomen alternativum Hime-tatara-i-suke-yori-hime.  (Id est posterior mutatio nominis, quoniam abhorruit facere mentionem privatarum partium). So therefore she is called the august child of a Deity. Hereupon seven beauteous maidens were out playing on the moor of Takasazhi,  and I-suke-yori-hime  was among them. His Augustness Ohokume,

seeing I-suke-yori-hime, spoke to the Heavenly Sovereign in a Song, saying:

"Seven maidens on the moor of Takasazhi in Yamato:--which shall be interlaced?"

Then I-suke-yori-hime was standing first among the beauteous maidens. Forthwith the Heavenly Sovereign, having looked at the beauteous maidens, and knowing in his august heart  that I-suke-yori-hime was standing in the very front, replied by a Song, saying:

"Even [after nought but] a fragment[ary glimpse], I will intertwine the lovely [one] standing in the very front.

Then His Augustness Ohokume informed I-suke-yori-hime  of the Heavenly Sovereign's decree, whereupon she, seeing the slit sharp eyes  of His Augustness Ohokume, sang in her astonishment, saying:

        "

       ?

       ?

      "

       ?

       ?

      "Wherefore   the slit sharp eye?

Then His Augustness Ohokume replied by a Song, saying:

"My slit sharp eyes [are] in order to find the maiden immediately."

So the maiden said that she would respectfully serve [the Heavenly Sovereign].  Hereupon  the house of Her Augustness  I-suke-yori-hime was on [the back of] the River Sawi.  The Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to the abode of I-suke-yori-hime, and augustly slept  [there] one night.  (The reason why that river was called the River Sawi was that on the River's banks the mountain-lily-plant grew in abundance. So the name of the mountain-lily-plant was taken, and the designation

of River Sawi [bestowed]. The name by which the mountain-lily-plant was originally called was sawi). Afterwards, when I-suke-yori-hime came and entered into the palace, the Heavenly Sovereign sang augustly saying:

"In a damp hut on the reed-moor having spread layer upon layer of sedge mats, we two slept!

The names of the august children thus born were: His Augustness Hiko-ya-wi,  next His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi,  next His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi"  (Three Deities.)

[SECT. LII.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART. IX--TROUBLES WHICH FOLLOWED HIS DECEASE).]

So when, after the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign,   the elder half-brother, His Augustness Tagishi-mimi,  wedded  the Empress I-suke-yori-hime, he plotted how he might slay his three younger brethren, pending which their august  parent I-suke-yori-hime lamented, and made [the plot] known to her august children by a Song. The song said:

"From the River Sawi the clouds have risen across, and the leaves of the trees have rustled on Mount Unebi: the wind is about to blow."

Again she sang, saying:

"Ah! What rest on Mount Unebi as clouds in the day-time, will surely blow as wind at night-fall, [whence] the rustling of the leaves!"

When hereupon her august children, hearing and knowing [of the danger], were alarmed and forthwith were about to slay Tagishi-mimi, His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi said to his elder brother His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi: "Thy dear Augustness, [do thou] take a weapon, and go in and slay Tagishi-mimi." So he took a weapon and went in, and was about to slay him. But his arms and legs trembled so, that he was

unable to slay him. So then the younger brother His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi begged [to be allowed] to take the weapon which his elder brother held, and  went in and slew Tagishi-mimi. So again, in praise of his august name, he was called His Augustness Take-nuna-kaha-mimi.  Then His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi resigned [in favour of] the younger brother His Augustness Take-nuha-kaha-mimi, saying: "I could not slay the foeman; but Thine Augustness was at once able to slay him. So, though I be the elder brother, it is not right that I should be the superior.  Wherefore do Thine Augustness be the superior, and rule [all] beneath the Heaven. I  will assist Thine Augustness, becoming a priest,  and respectfully serving thee."

[SECT. LIII.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART X.--GENEALOGIES).]

So His Augustness Hiko-ya-wi (is the ancestor of the Chieftains of Mamuta,  and of the Chieftains of Teshima.)  His Augustness Kamu-ya-wi-mimi (is the ancestor of the Grandees of Oho,  of the Chieftains of the Tribe of Chihisako,  of the chieftains of  the Tribe of Sahahi,  of the Dukes  Hi,  of the Dukes of Ohokida,  of the Dukes of Aso,  of the Chieftains of the Granaries of Tsukushi,  of the Grandees of the Sazaki Tribe,  of the Rulers of the Tribe of Sazaki,  of the Rulers of Wo-Hatsuse,  of the Suzerains of Tsuke,  of the Rulers of the land of Iyo,  of the Rulers of the land of Shinanu,  of the Rulers of the land of Ihaki in Michinoku,  of the Rulers of the Land of Naka  in Hitachi,  of the Rulers of the land of Nagasa,  of the Suzerains of Funaki in Ise,  of the Grandees of Niha in Wohari,  and of the Grandees of Shimada.)

[SECT. LIV.--EMPEROR JIM-MU (PART XI.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).

His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi ruled the Empire. Altogether the august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Kamu-yamato-ihare-biko were one hundred and thirty-seven.  His august mausoleum is on the top of the Kashi Spur on the northern side of Mount Unebi.

[SECT. LV.--EMPEROR SUI-ZEI.]

His Augustness Kamu-nuna-kaha-mimi dwelt at the palace of Takawoka in Kadzuraki, [*1a] and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Kaha-mata-bime, [*2a] ancestress of the Departmental Lords of Shiki, [*3a] and begot  an august child: His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-demi  (one Deity), The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were forty-five. His august mausoleum is on the Mound of Tsukida.

[SECT. LVI.--EMPEROR AN-NEI.]

His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko-tama-de-mi dwelt in the palace of Ukiana at Kata-shiha, [*1b] and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Akuto-hime, [*2b] daughter of the Departmental Lord Haye, [*3b] elder brother of Kaha-mata-bime, and begot august children: His Augustness

[paragraph continues] Toko-ne-tsu-hiko-irone,  next His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo,  next His Augustness Shiki-tsu-hiko.  Of the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign,--three Deities,--His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. There were two Kings,  children of the next [brother], His Augustness  Shiki-tsu-hiko. One child  (was the ancestor of the Territorial Lords of Suchi in Iga,  of the Territorial Lords of Nabari,  and of the Territorial Lords of Minu);  one child,  His Augustness Wa-chi-tsumi,  dwelt in the palace of Miwi in Ahaji.  So this King had two daughters: the name of the elder was Hahe-irone,  and another name for her was Her Augustness Princess Oho-yamato-kuni-are:  the name of the younger was Hahe-irodo.  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were forty-nine. Augustness mausoleum est in privatis partibus Montis Unebi.

[SECT. LVII.--EMPEROR I-TOKU.]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-hiko-suki-tomo dwelt in the palace of Sakahiwo at Karu,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded her Augustness Princess Futo-ma-waka,  another name for whom was Her Augustness Princess Ihi-bi,  ancestress of the Departmental Lords of Shiki,  and begot august children: His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-wake-shine,  next His Augustness Tagishi-hiko  (two Deities). So His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-kawe-shine [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next His Augustness Tagishi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Lords of Chinu,  of the Lords of Take in Tajima,  and of the Territorial Lords of Ashiwi).  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were forty-five. His august mausoleum is above the Vale of Manago by Mount Unebi.

[SECT. LVIII.--EMPEROR KO-SHO.]

His Augustness Mi-ma-tsu-hiko-kawe-shine dwelt at the palace of Waki-no-kami in Kadzuraki,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness  Princess Yoso-taho,  younger sister of Oki-tsu-yoso  ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari,  and begot august children: His Augustness Ame-oshi-tarashi-hiko,  and next His Augustness Oho-yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito  (two Deities). Now the younger brother, His Augustness Tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The elder brother His  Ame-oshi-tarashi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Kasuga,  the Grandees of Ohoyake,  the Grandees of Ahata,  the Grandees of Wonu;  the Grandees of Kaki-no-moto,  the Grandees of Ichihiwi;  the Grandees of Ohosaka,  the Grandees of Ana,  the Grandees of Taki:   the Grandees of Haguri,  the Grandees of Chita,  the Grandees of Muza;  the Grandees of Tsunuyama,  the Dukes of Ihitaka in Ise,  the Dukes of Ichishi,  and the Rulers of the Land of Chika-tsu-Afumi).

The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were ninety-three. His August mausoleum is on Mount Hakata  at Waki-no-kami.

[SECT. LIX.--EMPEROR KOAN.]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-tarashi-hiko-kuni-oshi-bito dwelt in the palace of Akidzushima at Muro  in Kadzuraki, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded his niece Her Augustness Princess Oshika,  and begot august children: His Augustness Oho-kibi-no-moro-susumi,  next His Augustness, Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-futo-ni  (two Deities). So His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-futo-ni  [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and twenty-three. His august mausoleum is on the Mound of Tamade.

[SECT. LX.--EMPEROR KO-REI.]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-futo-ni dwelt at the Palace of Ihodo at Kuruda,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Princess Kuhashi,  daughter of Ohome,  ancestor of the Departmental Lords of Tohochi,  and begot an august child: His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-kuni-kuru  (one Deity). Again he wedded Princess Chiji-haya-ma-waka of Kasuga,  and begot an august child: Her Augustness Princess Chiji-haya  (one Deity). Again wedding Her Augustness Princess Oho-yamato-kuni-are,  he begot august children: Her Augustness Yamato-to-mo-so-bime,  next His Augustness Hiko-sashi-kata-wake;  next His  Augustness Hiko-isa-seri-biko,  another name for whom is His Augustness Oho-biki-tsu-hiko: next Yamato-to-bi-haya-waka-ya-hime  (four Deities). Again he wedded Haheirodo,  younger sister of Her Augustness Princess Are, and begot august children,--His Augustness Hiko-same-ma,  next His Augustness Waka-hiko-take-kibi-tsu-hiko  (two Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all eleven Deities (five kings and three queens). So His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-kuni-kuru [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The two Deities His Augustness Oho-kibi-tsu-hiko and His Augustness Waka-take-kibi-tsu-hiko together set sacred jars  at the front  of the River Hi  in Hari-ma;  and, making Harima the mouth of the road,  subdued and pacified the Land of Kibi. So His Augustness  Oho-kibi-tsu-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Kamu-tsu-michi in Kibi)  The next, His Augustness Waka-hiko-take-kiki-tsu-hiko (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Shimo-tsu-michi in

[paragraph continues] Kibi  and of the Grandees of Kasa ). The next His Augustness Hiko-same-ma (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Uzhika in Harima ). The next, His Augustness Hiko-sashi-kata-wake (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Tonami in Koshi,  of the Grandees of Kunisaki in the Land of Toyo,  of the Dukes of Ihobara,  and of the Maritime Suzerains of Tsunuga).  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and six. His august mausoleum is at Umasaka at Kotawoka.

[SECT. XLI.--EMPEROR KO-GEN.]

His Augustness Oho-yamato-ne-ko-hiko -kuni-kuru dwelt in the palace of Sakaki-bara at Karu,  and ruled the Empire. This heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Utsu-shiko-me,  younger sister of His Augustness Utsu-shiko-wo,  ancestor of the Grandees of Hodzumi,  and begot august children: His Augustness Oho-biko,  next His Augustness Sukuna-biko-take-wi-goro;  next His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi  (three Deities).

[paragraph continues] Again, wedding Her Augustness I-gaka-shiko-me,  daughter of His Augustness Utsu-shiko-wo, he begot an august child: His Augustness Hiko-futu-oshi-no-makoto.  Again, wedding Princess Haniyasu,  daughter of Awotama  of Kafuchi, he begot an august child: His Augustness Take-hani-yasu-biko  (one Deity). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered in all five Deities]. So His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The children of  his elder brother, His Augustness Oho-biko, were His Augustness Take-numa-kaha-wake  (ancestor of the Grandees of Abe);  next His Augustness Hiko-inakoshi-wake  (This was the ancestor of the Butler Grandees.)  His Augustness Hiko-futu-oshi-no-mikoto wedded Princess Takachina of Kadzuraki,  young sister of Cho-nabi,  ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari,  and begot a child: the Noble Umashi Uchi.  (This was the ancestor of the Grandees of Uchi in Yamashiro.)  Again, wedding Princess Yama-shita-kage,  younger sister of Udzu-hiko,  ancestor of the Rulers of the Lord of Ki,  he begot a child, the Noble Take-Uchi  The children of this Noble Take-Uchi [numbered] in all nine (seven males and two females),-- namely] the Noble of Hata-no-Yashiro,  [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Hata,  of the Grandees of Hayashi,  of the Grandees of Hami,  of the Grandees of Hoshikaha,  of the Grandees of Afumi,  and of the Dukes of the Hatsuse Tribe);  next the Noble Kose-no-Wo-Kara  [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Kose,  of the Grandees of the Sazaki Tribe,  and of the Grandees of the Karu Tribe);  next the Noble Soga no Ishikaha  [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Soga,  of the Grandees of Kahanobe,  of the Grandees of Tanaka,  of the Grandees of Takamuko,  of the Grandees of Woharida  of the Grandees of Sakurawi,  and of the Grandees of Kishida);  next the Noble Heguri-no-Tsuku,

[paragraph continues] [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Heguri,  of the Grandees of Sawara,  and of the Uma-mi-kuhi Chiefs)  next the Noble Kino-Tsunu  [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Ki,  of the Grandees of Tsumu;  and of the Grandees of Sakamoto)  next Princess Mato of Kume;  next Princess Nu-no-iro;  next Kadzuraki-no-Nagaye-no-sotsu-biko  [who] (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Tamade,  of the Grandees of Ikuha,  of the Grandees  of Ikuye  and of the Grandees of Agina),  moreover [there was] the Noble Waku-go  (the ancestor of the Grandees of Yenuma).  This Heavenly Sovereign's august years were fifty-seven. His august mausoleum is on the mound in the middle of the Pool of Tsurugi.

[SECT. LXII.--EMPEROR KAI-KUWA.]

His Augustness Waka-yamato-ne-ko-hiko-oho-bibi dwelt in the palace of Izakaha at Kasuga,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Princess of Takanu,  daughter of Yugori  the Great Departmental Lord of Taniha,  and begot an august child: His  Augustness Hiko-yumusumi,  (one Deity). Again he wedded his step-mother, Her Augustness I-gaka-shiko-me,  and begot august children: His Augustness Mima-kiri-biko-iniwe;  next Her Augustness Mima-tsuhime  (two Deities). Again he wedded Her Augustness Oke-tsu-hime,  younger sister of His Augustness Hiko-kuni-oketsu,  ancestor of the Grandees of Wani,  and begot an august child: King Hiko-imasu  (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Washi,  daughter of the Noble Kadzuraki-no-tarumi,  he begot an august child,--King Take-tayo-hadzura-wake  (one Deity); The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all five Deities (four Kings and one Queen), So His Augustness Mi-maki-iri-biko-iniwe [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The children of his elder brother, King Hiko-yumusumi were: King Oho-tsutsuki-tari-ne;  next King Sanugi-tari-ne  (two Kings). There  were five Deities daughters of these two Kings. Next King Hiko-imasu wedded the Princess of Yena in Yamashiro,  another name for whom was Kari-bata-tobe,  and begot children: King Oho-mata;  next King Wo-mata;  next King Noble [of?] Shibumi  (three Deities). Again, wedding Saho-no-oho-kurami-tome,  daughter of Take-kuni-katsu-tome, of Kasuga,  he begot children: King Saho-biko;  next King Wo-zaho;  next Her Augustness Saho-bime,  another name for whom is Sahaji-hime

[paragraph continues] (Her Augustness Saho-bime here mentioned was consort of the Heavenly Sovereign Ikume);  and King Muro-biko,  (four Deities). Again, wedding Okinaga-no-midzu-yori-hime,  daughter of the  Heavenly Deity Mikage,  who is held in reverence by the deacons of Mikami in Chika-tsu-Afumi,  he begot children: King Tatatsu-michi-no-ushi, Prince of Taniha;  next King Midzuho-no-ma-wa-ka;  next King Kamu-oho-ne,  another name for whom is King Yatsuri-iri-biko;  next Midzuho-no-i-ho-yori-hime;  next Mimi-tsu-hime;  (three Deities). Again, wedding his mother's younger sister Her Augustness Woke-tsu-hime,  he begot children: King Ma-wata of Oho-tsutsuki in Yamashiro;  next King Hiko-osu;  next king Iri-ne  (two Deities). Altogether the children of King Hiko-imasu [numbered] in all eleven Kings. So the children of the elder brother King Oho, mata were: King Ake-tatsu;  next King Unakami   (two Deities). This King Ake-tatsu (was the ancestor of the Dukes of the Homuji Tribe in Ise  and of the Rulers of Sana in Ise)  King Una-kami (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Himeda.  The next King Wo-mata (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Magari in Tagima).  The next King Noble Shibumi (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Sasa)  The next King Saho-biko (was the ancestor of the Chiefs of the Kusaka Tribe  and of the Rulers of the Land of Kahi).  The next, King Wo-zaho (was the ancestor of the Lords of Kadzunu  and the Lords of Kanu in Chika-tsu-Afumi.)  The next King Muro-biko (was the ancestor of the Lords of Mimi in Wakasa.).  King Michi-no-ushi wedded the Lady Masu of Kahakami in Taniha,  and begot children: Her Augustness Princess Hibasu;  next Her Augustness Princess Matonu;  next Her Augustness Oto-hime;  next King Mi-kado-wake  (four Deities). This King Mikado-wake  (was the ancestor of the Lords of Ho in Mikaha).  Prince Midzuho-no-ma-waka, younger brother of this King Michi-no-ushi,

[paragraph continues] (was the ancestor of the Suzerains of Yasu in Chika-tsu-Afumi).  The next, King Kamu-oho-be (was the ancestor of the [Rulers of] the Land of Minu,  of the Rulers of the land of Motosu,  and of the Chiefs of the Nagahata Tribe)  The next, King Mawaka of Oho-tsutsuki in Yama-shiro wedded Princess Ajisaha of Mone,  daughter of his younger brother Irine, and begot a child: King Kami-me-ikadzuchi.  This King wedded Princess Takaki,  daughter of the Grandee Tohotsu of Taniha  and begot a child: King Noble Okinaga.  This king wedded the Princess of Takanuka in Kadzuraki,  and begot children: Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi  next Her Augustness Sora-tsu-hime;  next King Prince Okinaga  (three Deities. This  King was the ancestor of the Dukes of Homuji in Kibi,  and of the Dukes of Aso in Harima).  Again King Noble Okinaga wedded Princess Inayori of Kahamata  and begot a child: King Oho-tama-saka  (This was the ancestor of the Rulers of the land of Tajima).  The above-mentioned Take-toyo-hadzu-ra-wake (was the ancestor of the Grandees of Chimori,  of the Rulers of the Oshinumi Tribe,  of the Rulers of the Mima Tribe,  of the Oshinumi Tribe in Inaba,  of the Lords of Takanu in Taniba,  and of the Abiko of Yosami).  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were sixty-three. His august mausoleum is at the top of the hill of Izakaha.

[SECT. LXIII.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART I.--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Mima-ki-iri-biko-iniwe dwelt at the Palace of Midzu-gaki at Shiki,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Tohotsu-no-ayu-me-me-kuhashi,  daughter of Arakaha-to-be,  Ruler of the land of Ki,  and begot august children: His Augustness Toyo-ki-iri-biko,  and next Her Augustness Toyo-suki-iri-bime  (two Deities). Again, wedding the Great Princess of Ama,  ancestress of the Chiefs of Wohori,  he begot august children: His Augustness Oho-iri-ki;  next His Augustness

[paragraph continues] Ya-saka-no-iri-biko; next Her Augustness Nuna-ki-no-iri-bime; next Her Augustness Towochi-no-iri-bime  (four Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Princess Mimatsu,  daughter of His Augustness Oho-biko, he begot august children: His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi  next His Augustness Iza-no-ma-waka;  next Her Augustness Princess Kuni-kata;  next Her Augustness  Princess Chiji-tsuku-yamato;  next Her Augustness Princess Iga;  next His Augustness Yamato-Hiko  (six Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] in all twelve Deities (seven Kings and Queens). So His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next, His Augustness Toyo-ki-iri-biko (was the ancestor [of the Dukes] of Kami-tsu ke-nu,  and the Dukes of Shimo-tsu-ke-nu).  The younger sister, Her Augustness Princess Toyo-Suki (was high-priestess of  the temple of the Great Deity of Ise.)  The next brother, His Augustness Oho-iri-ki (was ancestor of the Grandees of Noto).  The next, His Augustness Yamato-hiko,--(in the time of this King a hedge of men was the first time set in the mausoleum).

[SECT. LXIV.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART II.--A PESTILENCE IS STAID BY OHO-TATA-NE-KO).]

In the reign of this Heavenly Sovereign a great pestilence arose, and the people died as if none were to be left.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign grieved and lamented, and at night, while on his divine couch,  there appeared [to him] in an august dream the Great Deity the Great-Master-of-Things,  and said: "This is my august doing.  So if thou wilt cause me to be worshipped  by Oho-tata-ne-ko,  the divine spirit shall not arise,  and the land will be tranquillized." When, therefore, couriers  were dispatched in every direction  to search for the person [named] Oho-tata-ne-ko, he was discovered in the village of Minu  in Kafuchi, and was respectfully sent [to the Heavenly Sovereign].  Then the Heavenly Sovereign deigned to ask: "Whose child art thou?" He replied, saying: "I  am Oho-tats-ne-ko, child of

[paragraph continues] His Augustness Take-mika-dzu-chi  [who was] child of His Augustness Ihi-gata-sumi,  [who was] child of His Augustness Kushi-mi-gata,  [who was] child of the Great Deity the Great-Master-of-Things by his wife Iku-tama-yori-bime,  daughter of His Augustness Suwe-tsu-mimi.  Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, being greatly rejoiced, commanded that the Empire should be tranquil, and the people flourish, and forthwith made His Augustness Oho-tata-ne-ko high priest  to worship  the Great Deity of Great Miwa  on Mount Mimoro.  Again he ordered His Augustness Igaka-shiko-wo  to make eighty heavenly platters, and reverently to establish the shrines of the Earthly Deities;  likewise to worship with a red-coloured shield and spear the Deity of Sumi-saka  at Uda, and with a black-coloured shield and spear the Deity of Oho-sake;  likewise to present august offerings of cloth to all the Deities of the august declivities of the hills and to all the Deities of the reaches of the rivers, without neglecting any.   In consequence of this the pestilential vapour ceased altogether, and the country was tranquillized.

[SECT. LXV.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART III: STORY OF OHO-TATA-NE-KO'S BIRTH)]

The reason why this person called Oho-tata-ne-ko was known to be a Deity's child, was that the above-mentioned Iku-tama-yori-bime was regularly beautiful,  whereupon a [divine ] youth [who thought] the majesty of her appearance without comparison in the world,  came suddenly to her in the middle of the night, So, as they loved each other and lived in matrimony together, the maiden ere long was pregnant. Then the father and mother, astonished at their daughter being pregnant, asked her,  saying: "Thou art pregnant by thyself. How art thou with child without [having known] a man?" She replied, saying: I have naturally conceived through a beautiful young

man, whose name  I know not, coming here every evening and staying with me." Therefore the father and mother, wishing to know the man, instructed their daughter, saying: "Sprinkle red earth in front of the couch,  and pass a skein of hemp through a needle, and pierce [therewith] the skirt of his garment." So she did as they had instructed, and, on looking in the morning, the hemp that had been put in the needle went out through the hole of the door-hook,  and all the hemp that remained was three twists  only. Then forthwith, knowing how he had gone out by the hook-hole, they went on their quest following the thread, which, reaching Mount Miwa, stopped at the shrine of the Deity, So they knew [that Oho-tata-neko was] the child of the Deity [residing] there. So the place was called by the name of Miwa on account of the three twists of hemp that had remained. (His Augustness Oho-tata-ne-ko, here referred to, was the ancestor of the Dukes of Miwa  and of the Dukes of Kamo.)

[SECT. LXVI.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART IV.--WAR WITH KING TAKE-HANI-YASU).]

Again in this august reign His Augustness Oho-biko  was sent to the circuit of Koshi,  and his son, His Augustness Take-nuna-kaha-wake,  was sent to the twelve circuits to the eastward to quiet the unsubmissive people. Again Hiko-imasu was sent to the land of Taniha  to slay Kugamimi-no-mikasa  (this is the name of a person). So when His Augustness Oho-biko was going away to the land of Koshi, a young girl wearing a loin-skirt  stood on the Pass of Hera  in Yamashiro, and sang, saying:

 "Now then! Oh Prince Mima-ki-iri! Oh Prince Mi-ma-ki-iri! Ignorant that they, to steal and slay one's life, cross backwards and forwards by the back-door, cross backwards and forwards by the front door and spy,--Oh, Prince Mima-ki-iri!"

Hereupon His Augustness Oho-kiko, thinking it strange, turned his horse back, and asked the young girl, saying: "These words that thou speakest, what are they?" The young girl replied, saying: "I said nothing; I was only singing a song,"--and thereupon she suddenly vanished, none could see whither. So his Augustness Oho-biko returned up again [to the capital] and made a report [of the matter] to the Heavenly Sovereign, who replied and charged him [saying]: "Methinks this is a sign that my half-brother, King Take-hani-yasu,  who dwells in the land of Yamashiro, is planning some foul plot.  [Do thou,] uncle, raise an army, and go [after him]." When he forthwith sent him off, joining to him his Augustness Hiko-kuni-buku,  ancestor of the Grandees of Wani,  they set sacred jars on the Pass of Wani,  and went away. Thereupon, when they reached the River Wakara   in Yamashiro, King Take-hani-yasu, who had raised an army, was waiting to intercept [their passage], and [the two hosts] stood confronting and challenging each other with the river between them.  So the place was called by the name of Idomi, --what is now called Idzumi. Then His Augustness Hiko-kuni-buku spoke, begging the other side  to let fly the first arrow.  Then King Take-hani-yasu shot, but could not strike. Thereupon, on his Augustness Kuni-buku shooting an arrow, it forthwith struck King Take-hani-yasu dead. So the whole army was routed, and fled in confusion. Then the [Imperial troops pursued] after the fugitive army as far as the ferry of Kusuba, when harassed by the pursuit, exterunt [hostium] excrementa, quae bracis adhaeserunt. Quare isti loco impositum est nomen Kusobakama. In proesenti nominatur Kusu-ba.  Again, on

being intercepted in their flight and cut down, [their bodies] floated like cormorants in the river. So the river was called by the name of U-kaha.  Again, because the warriors were cut to pieces, the place was called by the name of Hafuri-sono.  Having thus finished [the work of] pacification, they went up [to the capital] to make their report [to the Heavenly Sovereign].

[SECT. LXVII.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART V.--PEACE RESTORED AND TRIBUTE LEVIED).]

So His Augustness Oho-biko went away to Koshi in accordance with the previous [Imperial] commands. Then Take-nuna-kaha-wake, who had been sent round by the east, and his father Oho-biko met together in Ahidzu. So the place was called by the name of Ahidzu.  Wherefore, each of them, having settled the government of the land to which he had been sent, made his report [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. Then the Empire was at peace and the people prosperous. Thereupon tribute on the arrow-notches of the men and tribute on the finger-tips of the women was first levied.  So in praise of this august reign they said: "The Heavenly Sovereign Mimaki, who ruled the first land."  Again, in this reign the Pool of Yosami  was made; moreover the Pool of Sakawori at Karu  was made.

[SECT. LXVIII.--EMPEROR SU-JIN (PART VI.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and sixty-eight. His august mausoleum is on the mound at the corner of the Yamanobe road. [*1a]

[SECT. LXIX.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART I.--GENEALOGIES)]

His Augustness Ikume-iri-biko-isachi dwelt at the palace of Tama-kaki in Shiki, [*1b] and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness the

[paragraph continues] Princess Sahaji,  younger sister of His Augustness Saho-biko, and begot an august child: His Augustness Homo-tsu-wake  (one Deity). Again, wedding Her Augustness the Princess Hibasu, daughter of King Tatsu-michi-no-ushi, Prince of Taniha, he begot august children: His Augustness Ini-shiki-no-iri-biko;  next His Augustness Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake;  next His Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hiko;  next His Augustness Yamato-hime;  next His Augustness Waka-ki-iri-biko  (five Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Nubata-no-iri-bika,  younger sister of Her Augustness Princess Hibasu, he begot august children: His Augustness Nu-tarashi-wake;  next His Augustness Iga-tarashi-hiko  (two Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Azami-no-iri-bime,  younger  sister of His Augustness Nubata-no-iri-bime,  he begot august children: His Augustness Ikobaya-wake;  next Her Augustness the Princess of Azami  (two Deities). Again, wedding Her Augustness Kagu-ya-hime,  daughter of King Oho-tsutsuki-tari-ne, he begot an august child: King Wozabe  (one Deity). Again, wedding Karibata-tobe daughter of Fuchi Ohokuni in Yamashiro,  he begot august children: King Ochi-wake;  next King Ika-tarashi-hiko;  next King Itoshi-wake.  Again, wedding Oto-karibata-tobe,  daughter of Fuchi of Otokuni, he begot august children: King Iha-tsuku-wake;  next Her Augustness Iha-tsuku-bime, another name for whom was Her Augustness Futaji-no-iri-bime  (two Deities). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] altogether sixteen (thirteen Kings and three Queens). So His Augustness Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. (His august stature was ten feet   two inches: the length of his august shank was four feet one inch),

[paragraph continues] The next, His Augustness Inishi-no-iri-biko made the pool of Chinu;  again he made the pool of Sayama,  again he made the pool of Takatsu at Kusaka  Again he dwelt at the palace of Kahakami at Totori,  and caused a thousand cross-swords  to be made, and presented them to the temple of the Deity of Iso-no-kami.  Forthwith he dwelt at that palace,  and established the Kahakami Tribe,  The next, His Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hiko, (was the ancestor of the Lords of Yamanobe,  of the Saki. kusa,  of the Lords of Inaki,  Lords of the Ada,  of the Lords of Minui in the Land of Wohari:  of the Lords of Ihanashi in Kibi,  of the Lords of Koromo,  of the Lords of Takasuka,  of the Dukes of  Asuka,  and of the Lords of Mure).  The next, Her Augustness Yamato-hime, (was the high-priestess of   the temple of the Great Deity of Ise). The next, King Ikobaya-wake (was the ancestor of the Lords Anahobe at Saho).  The next, Her Augustness the Princess of Azami (was married to King Inase-biko). The next, King Ochi-wake (was the ancestor of the Mountain Dukes of Wotsuki  and of the Duke of Koromo in Mikaha).  The next, King Ika-tarashi-hiko (was the ancestor of the Mountain Dukes Kasuga,  of the Dukes of Ike in Koshi,  and of the Dukes of Kasugahe).  The next, King Itoshi-wake (owing to his having no children, made the Itoshi Tribe  his proxy). The next, King Iha-tsuku-wake, (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Haguchi  and of the Dukes of Miwo).  The next, Her Augustness Futaji-no-Iri-hime (became the empress of His Augustness Yamato-take).

[SECT. LXX. EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART II. CONSPIRACY OF KING SAHO-BIKO AND THE EMPRESS SAHO-BIME).]

When this Heavenly Sovereign made Saho-bime his Empress, Her Augustness Saho-bime's elder brother, King Saho-biko, asked his younger sister, saying: "Which is dearer [to thee], thine elder brother or thy

husband?" She replied, saying "Mine elder brother is dearer." Then King Saho-biko conspired, saying: "If I be truly the dearer to thee, let me and thee rule the empire," and forthwith he made an eight times tempered stiletto,  and handed it to his younger sister, saying: "Slay the Heavenly Sovereign in his sleep with this small knife." So the Heavenly Sovereign, not knowing of this conspiracy, was augustly sleeping, with the Empress' august knees as his pillow. Then the Empress tried to cut his august throat with the stiletto; but though she lifted it thrice, she could not cut the throat for an irrepressible feeling of sadness, and she wept tears, which fell overflowing  onto [the Heavenly Sovereign's] august face. Straightway the Heavenly Sovereign started up, and asked the Empress, saying: "I have had a strange dream: A violent shower came from the direction of Saho and suddenly wetted my face; again a small damask-coloured snake coiled itself round my neck. Of what may such a dream be the omen?" Then the Empress, thinking it improper to dispute,  forthwith informed the Heavenly Sovereign, saying: "Mine elder brother King Saho-biko asked me,  saying: 'Which is dearer [to thee], thy husband or thine elder brother?' So, as I was embarrassed by [this] direct question, I replied, saying: 'Oh! mine elder brother is the dearer.' Then he charged  me, saying: 'I and thou will together rule the  Empire; so the Heavenly Sovereign must be slain;'--and so saying, he made an eight times tempered stiletto, and handed it to me. Therefore I wanted to cut thine august throat; but though I thrice lifted [the weapon], a feeling of regret suddenly arose, so that I could not cut thy throat, and the tears that I wept fell and wetted

thine august face. [The dream] was surely the omen of this." Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: "How nearly have I been destroyed! "and forthwith he raised an army to smite King Saho-biko, whereupon the King made a rice-castle  to await the fray. At this time Her Augustness Saho-bime, unable to forget her elder brother, fled out through the back-gate [of the palace], and came into the rice-castle.

[SECT. LXXI.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART III.--BIRTH OF PRINCE HOMU-CHI-WAKE AND DEATH OF THE CONSPIRATORS)]

At this time the Empress  was pregnant. Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign could not restrain [his pity for] the Empress, who was pregnant and whom he had loved for now three years. So he turned his army aside, and did not hasten the attack. During this delay, the august child that she had conceived was born. So having put out the august child and set it outside the rice-castle. she caused [these words( to be said to the Heavenly Sovereign: "If this august child be considered to be  the Heavenly Sovereign's august child, let him  deign to undertake it." Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign said:  "Although detesting the elder brother, I yet cannot repress my love for the Empress," and forthwith planned to secure the Empress. Wherefore, choosing from among his warriors a band of the strongest and deftest, he charged [them, saying]: "When ye take the august child, likewise abduct the queen its mother. Whether by the hair or by the hands, or wherever ye may best lay hold of her, clutch her and drag her out." Then the Empress, knowing his intention beforehand, shaved off all her hair and covered her head with her hair, and likewise made her jewel-string rotten and wound it thrice round her arm, and moreover made her august garments rotten by means of rice-liquor and put on the garments as if they were whole. Having made these preparations, she took the august child in her arms and pushed it outside the castle. Then the strong men, taking the august child, forthwith clutched at the august parent. Then, on their clutching her august hair, the august hair

fell off of itself; on their clutching her august arms, the jewel-string likewise snapped; on their clutching her august garments, the august garments at once tore. Therefore they obtained the august child, but did not get the august parent. So the warriors came back [to the Sovereign], and reported, saying: "On account of her august hair falling off of itself, of her august garments easily tearing, and moreover of the jewel-string which was wound round her august hand at once snapping, we have not got the august parent; but we have obtained the august child." Then the Heavenly Sovereign, sorry and angry, hated the people who made the jewels,  and deprived them all of their lands.  So the proverb says: "Landless jewels-makers."  Again did the Heavenly Sovereign cause  the Empress to be told, saying: "A child's name must be given by the mother; by what august name shall this child be called?" Then she replied, saying: "As he was born now at the time of the castle being burnt with fire and in the midst of the fire, it were proper to call him by the august name of Prince  Homu-chi-wake."  And again he caused her to be asked: "How shall he be reared?"  She replied, saying: "He must be reared by taking an august mother  and fixing on old bathing-women and young bathing-women."  So he was respectfully reared in accordance with the Empress's instructions. Again he asked the Empress, saying: "Who shall loosen the fresh small pendant  which thou elitist make fast?" She replied,  saying: "It were proper that Ye-hime and Oto-hime,  daughters of King Tatasu-michi-no-ushi  prince of Taniha, should serve thee, for these two queens are of unsullied parentage."  So at last [the Heavenly Sovereign] slew King Saho-biko, and his younger sister followed him.

Wagimoko ga
      Yuhiteshi himo wo
 Tokame ye mo:
      Toyeba tayu to mo
      Tada ni afu made ni,
 Unabara wo
      Tohoku watarite
 Toshi-fu to-mo
      Ko-ra ga musuberu
      Himo toku na yume.

Tanigaha Shisei also appropriately quotes the following:

Futari shite
      Musubiski himo wo
      Hitori shite
 Ware ha toki-mizhi
      Tada ni afu made ha.

a literal rendering of which would run thus: "I will not, till we meet face to face, loosen alone the girdle which we two tied together."

[SECT. LXXII.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART IV.--THE DUMB PRINCE HOMU-CHI-WAKE).]

So the way they led about and amused the august child was by making a two-forked boat  out of a two-forked cryptomeria from Ahidzu in Wohari,  bringing it up and floating it on the Pool of Ichishi and on the Pool of Karu  in Yamato, [thus] leading about and amusing the august child. Nevertheless the august child spoke never a word, though his eight-grasp beard reached to the pit of his stomach.  So  it was on hearing the cry of a high-flying swan  that he made his first utterance.  Then [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent Yamanobe-no-Ohotaka  (this is a name of a person) to catch the bird. So this person, pursuing the swan, arrived in the Land of Harima from the Land of Ki, and again in his pursuit crossed over to the Land of Inaba, then reaching the Land of Taniba and the Land of Tajima; [thence] pursuing round  to the eastward, he reached the Land of Afumi. and thereupon crossed over into the Land of Minu; and, passing along by the Land of Wohari, pursued it into the Land of Shinanu, and at length, reaching in his pursuit the Land of Koshi, spread a net in the Estuary of Wanami,  and, having caught the bird, brought it up [to the capital] and presented it [to the Sovereign]. So that estuary is called the Estuary of Wanami. It had been thought that, on seeing the bird again, he would speak; but he did not speak, as had been thought.  Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, deigning to be grieved, augustly fell asleep, when, in an august dream, he was instructed, saying: "If thou wilt build my temple like unto thine august abode, the august child shall surely speak." When he had been thus instructed, [the Heavenly

[paragraph continues] Sovereign] made grand divination to seek what Deity's desire  this might be. Then [it was discovered that] the curse was the august doing of the Great Deity of Idzumo.  So when about to send the august child to worship [at] that Great Deity's temple, [he made divination to discover ] by whom it were well to have him attended. Then the lot fell on King Ake-tatsu.  So he  made King Ake-tatsu swear,  saying: "If there is truly to be an answer  to our adoration of this Great Deity, may the heron dwelling on the tree by the Pool of Sagisu  here fall [through my] oath." When he thus spoke, the heron that had been sworn by fell to the ground dead. Again on his commanding it to come to life] in answer to his] oath, it then came to life again.  Moreover he caused to wither by an oath and again brought to life again by an oath a broad-foliaged bear-oak on Cape Amakashi.  Then [the Heavenly Sovereign] granted to Prince Ake-tatsu the name of Prince Yamato-oyu-shiki-tomi-tomi-toyo-asakura-ake-tatsu.  So when the august child was sent off with the two Princes, Prince Ake-tatsu and Prince Una-kami,  as his attendants, it was divined  that [if they went out] by the Nara gate,   they would meet a lame person and a blind person;  [if they went out] by the Ohosaka  gate, they would likewise meet a lame person and a blind person, and that only the Ki gate,--a side gate, --would be the lucky gate; and when they started off, they established the Homuji clan  in every place they arrived at. So when they had reached Idzumo and had finished worshipping the Great Deity, and were returning up [to the capital], they made in the middle of the River Hi  a black plaited bridge and respectfully offered a temporary palace [for the august

child] to dwell in.  Then when the ancestor of the rulers of the Land of Idzumo, whose name was Kihisa-tsu-mi,   having made an imitation green-leafed mountain,  placed [it] in the lower reach of the river, and was about to present the great august food the august child  spoke, saying: "What here resembles a green-leafed mountain in the lower [reach of the] river; looks like a mountain, but is not a mountain. Is it perchance the great court  of the deacons  who holds in reverence the Great Deity Ugly-Male-of-the-Reed-Plains  that dwells in the temple of So at Ihakuma in Idzumo?  [Thus] he deigned to ask. Then the Kings, who had been sent in august attendance [on him], hearing with joy and seeing with delight,  set the august child to dwell in the palace of Nagaho at Ajimasa,  and despatched a courier [to inform the Heavenly Sovereign]. Then the august child wedded  Princess Hinaga  for one night. So, on looking privately at the beautiful maiden, [he found her] to be a serpent, at the sight of which he fled away alarmed. Then Princess Hinaga was vexed, and, illuminating the sea-plain,  pursued after them in a ship; and they, more and more alarmed at the sight, pulled the august vessel across the mountain-folds,  and went fleeing up [to the capital]. Thereupon they made a report, saying: "We have come up [to the capital] because thy great and august child has become able to speak through worship-ping the Great Deity." So the Heavenly Sovereign, delighted, forthwith sent King Unakami back to build the Deity's temple. Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, on account of this august child, established the Totori Clan, the Torikahi Clan, the Homuji Clan, the Ohoyuwe and the Wakayuwe.

[SECT. LXXIII. EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART. V.--HIS LATER WIVES.)]

Again, in accordance with the Emperor's words, he summoned Her Augustness Princess Hibasu, next Her Augustness Princess Oto, next Her Augustness Princess Utakori, next Her Augustness Princess Matonu,  daughters of Prince Michi-no-ushi--four Deities in all. Now he  kept the two Deities Her Augustness Princess Hibasu and Her Augustness Princess Oto; but as for the two Deities the younger queens, he sent them back to their native place on account of their extreme hideousness. Thereupon Princess Matonu said with mortification: "When it is known in the neighbouring villages that, among sisters of the same family, we have been sent back on account of our ugliness, it will be extremely mortifying;" and, on reaching Sagaraka  in the Land of Yamashiro, she tried to kill herself  by hanging herself from a branch of a tree. So that place was called by the name of Sagariki. It is now called Sagaraka. Again, on reaching Otokuni,  she at last killed herself by jumping  into a deep pool. So that place was called by the name of Ochikuni. It is now called Otokuni.

[SECT. LXXIV.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART VI.--TAJI-MORI BRINGS BACK THE ORANGE FROM THE ETERNAL LAND.)]

Again the Heavenly Sovereign sent Tajima-mori,  ancestor of the Chiefs of Miyake,  to the Eternal Land  to fetch the fruit of the everlasting  fragrant tree. So Tajima-mori at last reached that country, plucked the fruit of the tree, and brought of clubmoss eight and of spears eight; but meanwhile the Heavenly Sovereign had died. Then Tajima-mori set apart of clubmoss four and

of spears four, which he presented to the Great Empress,  and set up of clubmoss four and of spears four as an offering at the door of the Heavenly Sovereign's august mausoleum,  and, raising on high the fruit of the tree, wailed and wept, saying: "Bringing the fruit of the ever-lasting fragrant tree from the Eternal Land, I have come to serve thee;" and at last he wailed and wept himself to death. This fruit of the everlasting fragrant tree is what is now called the orange.

[SECT. LXXV.--EMPEROR SUI-NIN (PART VII.--HIS DEATH AND THAT OF THE EMPRESS HIBASU.)]

This Heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and fifty-three. His august mausoleum is in the middle of the moor of Mitachi at Sugahara.  Again in the time of the Great Empress Her Augustness Princess Hibasu,  the Stone-Coffin-Makers  were established, and also the Earthenware-Masters' Clan  was established. This Empress was buried in the mausoleum of Terama near Saki.

[SECT. LXXVI.--EMPRESS KEI-KO (PART I,--GENEALOGIES)]

The Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake dwelt in the palace of Hishiro at Makimuku,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Elder Lady of Inabi in Harima,  daughter of Waka-take, Prince of Kibi  ancestor of the Grandees of Kibi,  and begot

august children: King Kushi-tsunu-wake;  next His Augustness Ohousu;  next His Augustness Wo-usu, another name for whom is His Augustness Yamato wo-guna;  next His Augustness Yamato-ne-ko;  next King Kamu-kushi.  Again wedding Her Augustness Princess Yasaka-no-iri,   daughter of His Augustness Prince Yasaka-no-iri, he begot august children: His Augustness Prince Waka-rarashi;  next His Augustness Prince Iho-ki-no-iri;  next His Augustness Oshi-no-wake;  next Her Augustness Princess Iho-ki-no-iri.  Children by another concubine were: King Toyo-to-wake;  next the Lady Nunoshiro.  Children by another concubine were: the Lady Nunaki;  next Her Augustness Princess Kago-yori;  next King Prince Waka-ki-no-iri;  next King the Elder Prince of Kibi-no-ye;  next Her Augustness Princess Takaki;  next Her Augustness Princess Oto.  Again wedding Princess Mi-hakashi of Himuku,  he begot an august child: King Toyo-kuni-wake.  Again wedding the Younger Lady of Inabi,  younger sister of the Elder Lady of Inabi,  he begot august children: King Ma-waka; next King Hiko-hito-no-oho-ye.  Again wedding Princess  Ka-guro,  daughter of King Princess Sume-iro-oho-naka-tsu-hiko,  great-grand-child of His Augustness Yamato-take,  he begot an august child: King Oho-ye.  The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko numbered in all twenty-one kings and queens  of whom there is a register, and fifty-nine kings and queens of whom there is no record,--eighty kings and queens altogether, out of whom His Augustness Waka-tarashi-hiko and also His Augustness Yamato-take, and also His Augustness Prince I-ho-ki-no-iri,--these three Kings,--bore the name of Heirs Apparent.  The seventy-seven

kings and queens beside these  were all granted Rulerships in the various lands, or else [posts as] Lords, Territorial Lords or Departmental Chiefs.  So His Augustness Waka-tarashi-hiko [was he who afterward] ruled the Empire. His Augustness Wo-usu subdued the savage deities and likewise the unsubmissive people in the East  and West. The next, King Kushi-tsunu-wake (was the ancestor of the chiefs of Mamuta).  The next, His Augustness Oho-Usu, (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mori,  of the Dukes of Ohota  and of the Dukes of Shimada.)  The next, King Kamukushi, (was the ancestor of the Sakabe Abiko in the Land of Ki,  and of the Sakabe of Uda).  The next, King Toyo-kuni-wake (was the ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Himuka.)

[SECT. LXXVII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART II.--THE MAIDENS YE-HIME AND OTO-HIME).]

Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, to assure himself of what he had heard of the beauty of the two maidens Ye-hime and Oto-hime,  daughters of King Kamu-ohone,  ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Minu,  sent his august child, His Augustness Oho-usu, to summon them up [to the Capital]. So His Augustness Oho-usu who had been sent, instead of summoning them up, forthwith wedded both the maidens himself, and then sought other women, to whom he falsely gave the maidens' names, and sent them up [to his father]. Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, knowing them to be other women, frequently subjected them to his long glances;  but, never wedding them, caused them to sorrow. So the child that His Augustness Oho-usu begot on wedding Ye-hime,  was King Oshi-kuro-no-ye-hiko  (he was the ancestor of the Lords of Unesu in Minu.)  Again, the child that he begot on wedding Oto-hime, was King Oshi-kuro-no-oto-hiko (he was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mugetsu.)

[SECT. LXXVIII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART III. VARIOUS DEEDS.)]

In this august reign the Labourers' Tribe [*1a] was established; again, the port of Aha in the East was established; again, the Great Butlers' Tribe  was established; again, the granaries of Yamato were established; again, the Pool of Sakate was made, and bamboos planted on the bank.

[SECT. LXXIX.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART IV.--YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS HIS ELDER BROTHER).]

The Heavenly Sovereign said to His Augustness Wo-usu: "Why does not thine elder brother come forth to the morning and evening great august repasts? [*1b] Be thou the one to take the trouble to teach him [his duty]." Thus he commanded; but for five days after, still [the prince] came not forth. Then the Heavenly Sovereign deigned to ask His Augustness Wo-usu [saying]: "Why is thine elder brother so long of coming? Hast thou perchance not yet taught him [his duty]?" He replied,  saying: "I have been at that trouble." Again [the Heavenly Sovereign] said "How didst thou take the

trouble?" [*2a] He replied, saying: "In the early morning when he went into the privy, I grasped hold of him and crushed him, and, pulling off his limbs, [*3a] wrapped them in matting and flung them away."

[SECT. LXXX. EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART V.--YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE KUMASO BRAVOES).]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, alarmed at the valour and ferocity of his august child's disposition, commanded him, saying: "In the West there are two Kumaso bravoes, --unsubmissive and disrespectful men. So take [*2b] them,"--and [with this command] he sent him off. It happened that at this time his august hair was bound at the brow. [*3b] Then His Augustness Wo-usu was granted by his aunt Her Augustness Yamato-hime  her august [upper] garment and august skirt; and, with a sabre hidden in his august bosom, he went forth.  So, on reaching the house of the Kumaso bravoes, he saw that near the house there was a three-fold belt of warriors, who had made a cave  to dwell in. Hereupon they, noisily discussing a rejoicing for the august cave,  were getting food ready. So [Prince Wo-usu sauntered about the neighbourhood, waiting for the day of the  rejoicing. Then when the day of the rejoicing came, having combed down after the manner of girls his august hair which was bound up,  and having put on his aunt's august [upper] garment and august skirt, he looked quite

like a young girl, and, standing amidst the women,  went inside the cave. Then the elder brother and the younger brother, the two Kumaso bravoes, delighted at the sight of the maiden, set her between them, and rejoiced exuberantly. So, when [the feast was] at its height, [His Augustness Wo-usu], drawing the sabre from his bosom, and catching Kumaso  by the collar of his garment, thrust the sabre through his chest, whereupon, alarmed at the sight, the younger bravo ran out. But pursuing after and reaching him at the bottom of the steps  of the cave, and catching him by the back,  [Prince Wo-usu] thrust the sabre through his buttock. Then the Kumaso bravo spoke, saying: "Do not move the sword; I  have something to say." Then [His Augustness Wo-usu], respited him for a moment, holding him down [as he lay] prostrate. Hereupon [the bravo] said: "Who is Thine Augustness?" Then he said: "I am the august child of Oho-tarashi-hiko-oshiro-wake, the Heavenly Sovereign who, dwelling in the palace of Hishiro at Makimuku, rules the Land of the Eight Great Islands; and my name is King Yamato-wo-guna. Hearing that you two [fellows ], the Kumaso bravoes, were unsubmissive and disrespectful, [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent me with the command to take and slay you." Then the Kumaso bravo said: "That must  be true. There are no persons in the West so brave and strong as we two.  Yet in the Land of Great Yamato there is a man braver than we two,--there is.  Therefore will I offer thee an august name. From this time forward it is right that thou be praised as the August Child Yamato-take."  As soon as he had finished saying this, [the Prince] ripped him up  like a ripe

melon,  and slew him.  So thenceforward he was praised by being called by the august name of  his Augustness Yamato-take. When he returned up [to the capital] after doing this, he subdued and pacified every one of the Deities of the mountains and of the Deities of the rivers and likewise of the Deities of Anado,  and then went up to [the capital].

[SECT. LXXXI.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART VI.--YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE IDZUMO BRAVO).

Forthwith entering the Land of Idzumo, and wishing to slay the Idzumo bravo, he on arriving, forthwith bound [himself to him in] friendship. So, having secretly  made [the wood of] an oak [-trees ] into a false sword and augustly girded it, he went with the bravo to bathe the River Hi.  Then, His Augustness Yamato-take

getting out of the river first, and taking and girding on the sword that the Idzumo bravo had taken off and laid down, said: "Let us exchange swords!" So afterwards the Idzumo bravo, getting out of the river, girded on His Augustness Yamato-take's false sword. Hereupon His Augustness Yamato-take, suggested, saying: "Come on! let us cross  swords." Then on drawing his sword, the Idzumo bravo could not draw the false sword. Forthwith His Augustness Yamato-take drew his sword and slew the Idzumo bravo. Then he sang augustly, saying:

"Alas that the sword girded on the Idzumo bravo, and wound round with many a creeper, should have had no true blade!"

So having thus extirpated the [bravoes] and made [the land] orderly, he went up [to the capital], and made his report [to the Heavenly Sovereign].

[SECT. LXXXII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART VII.--YAMATO-TAKE IS SENT TO SUBDUE THE EAST, AND VISITS HIS AUNT AT ISE).]

Then the Heavenly Sovereign again urged a command on His Augustness Yamato-take, saying: "Subdue and pacify the savage Deities and likewise the unsubmissive people of the twelve roads of the East;"  and when he sent him off, joining to him Prince Mi-suki-tomo-mimi-take,  ancestor of the Grandees of Kibi,  he bestowed on  him a holly-wood  spear eight fathoms [long]. So when he had received the [Imperial] command and started off, he went into the temple of the Great August Deity of Ise, and worshipped the Deity's court,  forthwith speaking to his aunt, Her Augustness Yamato-hime, saying: "It must surely be that the Heavenly Sovereign thinks  I may die quickly; for after sending me to smite the wicked people of the West, I am no sooner come up again [to the capital] than, without bestowing on me an army, he now sends me off afresh to pacify the wicked people of the twelve circuits of the East. Consequently I think that he certainly thinks I shall die quickly." When he departed with lamentations and tears, Her Augustness Yamato-hime bestowed on him the "Herb-Quelling-Sabre,"  and likewise bestowed on him an august bag,  and said: "If there should be an emergency, open the mouth of the bag."

[SECT. LXXXIII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART VIII.--YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE RULERS OF SAGAMU.)]

So reaching the Land of Wohari, he went into the house of Princess Miyadzu,  ancestress of the Rulers of Wohari,  and forthwith thought to wed her; but thinking again that he would wed her when he should return up [toward the capital], and having plighted his troth, he went [on] into the Eastern Lands, and subdued and pacified all the savage Deities and unsubmissive people of the mountains and rivers. So then, when he reached the Land of Sagamu,  the Ruler of the land lied, saying: "In the middle of this moor is a great lagoon, and the Deity that dwells in the middle of the lagoon is a very violent Deity." Hereupon [Yamato-take] entered the moor to see the Deity. Then the Ruler of the land set fire to the moor. So, knowing that he had been

deceived, he opened the mouth of the bag which his aunt, Her Augustness Yamato-hime had bestowed on him, and saw that inside of it there was a fire-striker.  Hereupon he first mowed away the herbage with his august sword, took the fire-striker and struck out fire, and, kindling a counter-fire, burnt [the herbage] and drove back [the other fire], and returned forth, and killed and destroyed all the Rulers  of that Land, and forthwith set fire to and burnt them. So [that place] is now called Yakidzu.

[SECT. LXXXIV.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART IX.--YAMATO-TAKE'S EMPRESS STILLS THE WAVES.)

When he thence penetrated on, and crossed the sea of Hashiri-midzu,  the Deity of that crossing raised the waves, tossing the ship so that it could not proceed across. Then [Yamato-take's] Empress,  whose name was Her Augustness Princess Oto-tachibana  said: "I  will enter the sea instead of the august child.  The august child must complete the service  on which he has been sent, and take back a report [to the Heavenly Sovereign]." When she was about to enter the sea, she spread eight thicknesses of sedge rugs,  eight thicknesses of skin rugs and eight thicknesses of silk rugs on the top of the waves, and sat down on the top [of them] Thereupon the violent waves at once went down, and the august ship was able to proceed. Then the. Empress sang, saying:

"Ah! thou [whom I] enquired of, standing in the midst of the flames of the fire burning on the little moor of Sagamu, where the true peak pierces!"

So seven days afterwards the Empress's august comb  drifted onto the sea-beach,--Which comb was forthwith taken and placed in an august mausoleum which was made.

[SECT. LXXXV.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART X.--YAMATO-TAKE SLAYS THE DEITY OF THE ASHIGARA PASS.)]

When, having thence penetrated on and subdued all the savage Yemishi  and likewise pacified all the savage Deities of the mountains and rivers, he was returning up [to the capital], he, on reaching the foot of the Ashigara Pass,  was eating his august provisions, when the Deity of the pass, transformed into a white deer, came and stood [before him]. Then forthwith, on his waiting  and striking [the deer] with a scrap of wild chive,  [the deer] was hit in the eye and struck dead. So, mounting to

the top of the pass, he sighed three times and spoke, saying: "Adzuma ha ya!"  So that land is called by the name of Adzuma.

[SECT. LXXXVI.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XI.--YAMATO-TAKE DWELLS IN THE PALACE OF SAKAWORI.)]

When, forthwith crossing over from that land out into Kahi,  he dwelt in the palace of Sakawori,  he sang, saying:

"How many nights have I slept since passing Nihibari and Tsukuha?"

Then the old man, who was the lighter of the august fire,  completed the august Song, and sang, saying:

"Oh! having put the days in a row, there are of nights nine nights, and of days ten days!"

Therefore [Yamato-take] praised the old man, and forthwith bestowed [on him] the Rulership of the Eastern Land[s].

[SECT. LXXXVII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XII.--YAMATO-TAKE WOOES PRINCESS MIYAZU).]

Having crossed over from that land into the land of Shinanu  and subdued the Deity of the Shinanu pass,  he came back to the land of Wohari, and went to dwell in the house of Princess Miyazu, to whom he had before plighted his troth. Hereupon, when presenting to him the great august food, Princess Miyazu lifted up a great liquor-cup and presented it to him. Tunc Herae Miyazu veli orae adhaeserunt menstrua. Quare [Augustus Yamato-take] ilia menstrua vidit, et auguste cecinit, dicens:

"Ego volui reclinare [caput] in fragili, molli brachiolo [tuo, quod est simile] vallo impingenti acutae falci in Monte Kagu in coelo formato quasi cucurbita;--ego desideravi dormire [tecum]. Sed in ora veli quod induis luna surrexit."

Tunc Herae Miyazu augusto cantui respondit, dicens:

"Alte resplendentis solis auguste puer! Placide administrationem faciens mi magne domine! Renovatis annis venientibus et effluentibus, renovatae lunae eunt veniendo patienter expecto, luna suapte surgit in ora veli quod ego induo!"

Quare tune [ille] coivit [cum illa], after which, placing in Princess Miyazu's house his august sword "the Grass-Quelling Sabre," he went forth  to take the Deity of [Mount] Ibuki.

Hisa-kata no
      Ame no Kagu-yamo
 To-kama ni
      Sa-wataru kuhi:--
 Hiha-boso
      Ta-waya-gahina wo etc.

It will he remarked that the first four lines form a "Punning Preface "to the fifth. Such Punning Prefaces have not necessarily any logical connection with what follows, as has been explained by the present writer in a paper "On the Use of Pillow Words and Plays upon Words in Japanese Poetry," to be found in Vol. V, Pt. I, pp. 79 et seq. of these "Transactions." In this particular case, however, there is sufficient continuity of sense to warrant the continuous translation above given. The word "post," though such a use of it is very curious, must be  to denote not a dead, but a living trunk, or rather the stem of some delicate plant or grass which falls beneath the sickle of the mower on Mount Kagu in Heaven, or, as it may better be understood, on the Heavenly Mount Kagu [in Yamato]. "Gourd-shaped "is the translation of hisa-kata no or hisa-gata no, the Pillow-Word for "heaven." Its meaning is disputed, but Mabuchi in his "Dictionary of Pillow-Words" and Motowori agree in giving to it the sense here adopted (see the above-mentioned paper "On the Use of Pillow-Words, etc.," p. 81).

[SECT. LXXXVIII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XIII.--YAMATO-TAKE MEETS THE DEITY OF MOUNT IBUKI).]

Hereupon he said: "As for the Deity of this mountain, I will simply take him empty-handed." --and was ascending the mountain, when there met him on the mountain-side a white boar whose size was like unto that of a bull.  Then he lifted up words,  and said: "This creature that is transformed into a white boar must be a messenger from the Deity.  Though I slay it not now, I will slay it when I return,"--and [so saying.] ascended. Thereupon the Deity caused heavy ice-rain  to fall, striking and perplexing His Augustness Yamato-take. (This creature transformed into a white boar was not a messenger from the Deity,  but the very Deity in person. Owing to the lifting up of words, he appeared and misled [Yamato-take. ]) So when, on descending back, he reached the fresh spring of Tama-kuro-be  and rested there, his august heart awoke somewhat.  So that fresh spring is called by the name of the fresh spring of Wi-same.

The title was omitted from the printed version I was working from. I have interpolated what I believe to be a plausible title--JBH

[SECT. LXXXIX. EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XIV.--THE DEATH OF YAMATO-TAKE).]

When he departed thence and reached the moor of  Tagi  he said: "Whereas my heart always felt like flying through the sky, my legs are now unable to walk. They have become rudder-shaped."  So that place was called by the name of Tagi. Owing to his being very weary with progressing a little further beyond that place, he leant upon an august staff to walk a little. So that place is called by the name of the Tsuwetsuki pass.  On arriving at the single pine-tree on Cape Wotsu,  an august sword, which he had forgotten at that place before when augustly eating,  was still [there] not lost. Then he augustly sang, saying:

"O mine elder brother, the single pine-tree that art on Cape Wotsu which directly faces Mohari! If thou, single pine-tree! wert a person, I would gird [my] sword [upon thee], I would clothe thee with [my] garments,--O mine elder brother, the single pine-tree!"

When he departed thence and reached the village of Mihe,  he again said: "My legs are like three-fold crooks,  and very weary." So that place was called by  the name of Mihe. When he departed thence and reached the moor of Nobe,  he, regretting  [his native] land,  sang, saying:

"As for Yamato, the most secluded of lands--Yamato, retired behind Mount Awogaki encompassing it with its folds is delightful!"

Again he sang, saying:

"Let those whose life may be complete stick [in their hair] as a head-dress the leaves of the bear-oak from Mount Heguri,--those children!"

This song is a Land-Regretting Song.  Again he sang, saying:

"How sweet! ah! from the direction of home clouds are rising and coming!"

This is an Incomplete Song.  At this time, his august sickness was very urgent. Then, he sang augustly, saying:

"The sabre-sword which I placed at the maiden's bed-side, alas! that sword!"

As soon as he had finished singing, he died, Then a courier was despatched [to the Heavenly Sovereign.]

[SECT. XC.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XV.--YAMATO-TAKE TURNS INTO A WHITE BIRD)]

Thereupon [his] Empresses  and likewise [his] august  children, who dwelt in Yamato, all went down  and built an august mausoleum, and, forthwith crawling hither and thither in the rice-fields encompassing [the mausoleum]. sobbed out a Song, saying:

"The Dioscorea quinqueloba crawling hither and thither among the rice-stubble, among the rice-stubble in the rice-fields encompassing [the mausoleum] . . ."

Thereupon [the dead prince], turning into a white dotterel  eight fathoms [long], and soaring up to Heaven, flew off towards the shore. Then the Empress and likewise the august children, though they tore their feet treading on the stubble of the bamboo-grass, forgot the pain, and pursued him with lamentations. At that time they sang, saying:

"Our loins are impeded in the plain [over-grown with] short bamboo-grass. We are not going through the sky, but oh! we are on foot."

 Again when they entered the salt sea,  and suffered as they went, they sang, saying.

"As we go through the sea, our loins are impeded,--tottering in the sea like herbs growing in a great river-bed."

Again when [the bird] flew and perched on the sea-side, they sang, saying:

"The dotterel of the beach goes not on the beach, but follows the seaside."

These four Songs were all sung at [Yamato-take's] august interment. So to the present day these Songs are sung at the great interment of a Heavenly Sovereign. So [the bird] flew off from that country,  and stopped at Shiki in the land of Kafuchi.  So they made an august mausoleum there, and laid [Yamato-take] to rest.   that august mausoleum was called by the  name of the "August-Mausoleum of the White-Bird."  Nevertheless the bird soared up thence to heaven again, and flew away.

[SECT. XCI.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XVI.--YAMATO-TAKE'S BUTLER).]

During all the time that this [Prince] His Augustness Yamato-take went about pacifying countries, Nana-tsuka-hagi, [*1a] ancestor of the Suzerains of Kuna, [*2a] always followed and respectfully served him as butler.

[SECT. XCII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XVII.--YAMATO-TAKE'S DESCENDANTS).]

This [Prince] His Augustness Yamato-take wedded Her Augustness Princess Futaji-no-iri, [*1b] daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Ikume, and begot an august child: His Augustness Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko [*2b] (one Deity). Again, wedding Her Augustness Princess Oto-tachibana  who [afterwards] entered the sea,  he begot an august child: King Waka-take  (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess  Futaji,  daughter of Oho-tamu-wake,  ancestor of the Rulers of the Land of Yasu in Chika-tsu-Afumi,  he begot an august child: King Ine-yori-wake  (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Oho-kibi-take,  younger sister of Take-hiko [ancestor of the] Grandees of Kiki,  he begot an

august child: King Take-kahiko  (one Deity). Again, wedding Princess Kukuma-mori of Yamashiro,  he begot an august child, King Ashi-kagami-wake  (one Deity). A child by another wife was King Okinaga-ta-wake.  Al-together the entire [number] of the august children of His Augustness Yamato-take was six Deities. So His Augustness Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. The next, King Ine-yori-wake (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Inukami  and of the Dukes of Takebe.)   The next, King Take-kahiko (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Aya in Sanugi,  the Dukes of Wake in Iyo,  the Lords of Towo,  the Headmen of Masa  and the Lords of Miyaji.)  King Ashi-kagami-wake (was the ancestor of the Lords of Kamakura,  the Dukes of Wodzu,  the Lords of Ihashiro  and the Lords of Fukita.)  The child of the next, King Okinaga-ta-wake was King Kuhi-mata-naga-hiko.  This King's children were: Her Augustness Princess Ihinu-ma-guro,  next Okinaga-ma-waka-naka-tsu-hime,  next Oto-hime  (three Deities). So the above mentioned King Waka-take wedded Princess Ihinu-ma-guro,  and begot King Sume-iro-oho-naka-tsu-hiko.  This King wedded Princess Shibanu,  daughter of Shibanu-iri-ki  of Afumi, and begot a child, Her Augustness Princess Kaguro.  So the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-tarashi-hiko wedded this [lady] Her Augustness Princess Kaguro, and begot King Oho-ye  (one Deity). This King wedded his younger half-sister Queen Shiro-kane,  and begot children: King Oho-na-gata,  and next Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime  (two Deities). So this [Lady] Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime was the august mother  of King Kagosaka  and King Oshikuma.

[SECT. XCIII.--EMPEROR KEI-KO (PART XVIII. HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

This Heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and thirty-seven, and his august mausoleum is above the Yamanobe road. [*1a]

[SECT. XCIV.--EMPEROR SEI-MU.]

The Heavenly Sovereign Wata-tarashi-hiko dwelt at the palace of Taka-anaho at Shiga [*1b] in Chika-tsu-Afumi and ruled the empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded  the Lady Oho-takara,  daughter of Take-oshiyama-tari-ne,  ancestor of the Grandees of Hodzumi,  and begot an august child: King Wata-nuke  (one Deity). So [the

[paragraph continues] Heavenly Sovereign] raised the Noble Take-uchi  [to the office of] Prince Minister,  deigned to settle the Rulers of the Great Countries and Small Countries,  and likewise deigned to settle the boundaries of the various countries, as also the Department Lords of the Great Departments and Small Departments.  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were ninety-five, and his august mausoleum is at Tatanami near Saki.

[SECT. XCV.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART I.--GENEALOGIES).]

The Heavenly Sovereign Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko dwelt at the palace of Toyora at Anado,  and likewise at the palace of Kashihi  in Tsukushi, and ruled the Empire.  This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Oho-naka-tsu-hime,  daughter of King Oho-ye, and begot august children: King Kagosaka and King Oshikuma (two Deities). Again he wedded Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi. This Empress  gave birth to august children: His Augustness Homu-ya-wake,  and next His Augustness Oho-tomo-wake,  another name for whom was His Augustness Homuda-wake.  The reason why this Heir Apparent  was given the august name of His Augustness Oho-tomo-wake was that when first  born, he had on his august arm [a protuberance of] flesh resembling an elbow-pad,  whence the august name bestowed on him. By this it was known while he was in the womb that he would rule countries.  In this august reign the granaries of Ahaji were established.

[SECT. XCVI. EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART II.--THE POSSESSION OF KOREA DIVINELY PROMISED).]

This Empress, Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi, was at that time,  divinely possessed. So when the Heavenly Sovereign, dwelling at the palace of Kashihi in Tsukushi, was about to smite the Land of Kumaso,  the Heavenly Sovereign played on his august lute, and the Prime  the Noble Take-uchi, being in the pure court,  requested the divine orders. Hereupon the Empress, divinely possessed, charged him with this instruction and counsel: "There is a land to the Westward,

and in that land is abundance of various treasures dazzling to the eye, from gold and silver downwards.  I will now bestow this land upon thee." Then the Heavenly Sovereign replied, saying: "If one ascend to a high place and look Westward, no country is to be seen. There is only the great sea;" and saying,  "They are lying Deities,"  he pushed away his august lute, did not play on it, and sat silent. Then the Deities were very angry, and said: "Altogether as for this empire, it is not a land over which thou oughtest to rule. Do thou go to the one road!"  Hereupon the Prince Minister the Noble Take-uchi said; "[I am filled with] awe, my Heavenly Sovereign!  Continue playing thy great  august lute." Then he slowly drew his august lute to him, and languidly played on it. So almost immediately the sound of the august lute became inaudible. On their forthwith lifting a light and looking, [the Heavenly Sovereign] was dead.

[SECT. XCVII.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART III. PREPARATIONS FOR THE CONQUEST OF KOREA).]

Then, astonished and alarmed, they set him in a mortuary palace,  and again taking the country's great offerings,  seeking out all sorts of crimes, such as flaying alive and flaying backwards,  breaking down the divisions of rice-fields, filling up ditches, evacuating excrements and urine, marriages between superiors and inferiors,  marriages with horses, marriages with cattle, marriages with fowls, and marriages with dogs, and having made a great purification of the land,  the Noble Takeuchi again stood in the pure court and requested the Deities' commands. Thereupon the manner of their instruction and counsel was exactly the same as on the former day: "Altogether this land is a land to be ruled over by the august child in Thine  august womb."  Then the Noble Take-uchi said, "[I am filled with] awe, my Great Deities] The august child in this Deity's  womb,  what [sort of] child may it be?" [The Deities] replied, saying: "It is a male child." Then [the Noble Take-uchi] requested more particularly, [saying]: "I wish to know the august names of the Great Deities whose words have now thus instructed us." Forthwith [the Deities] replied, saying: "It is the august doing  of

the Great-August-Heaven-Shining-Deity, likewise it is the three great Deities Bottom-Possessing-Male, Middle-Possessing Male and Surface-Possessing-Male.  (At this time the august names of these three great Deities were revealed. ) If now thou truly thinkest to seek that land, thou must, after presenting the offerings  to every one of the Heavenly Deities and Earthly Deities,  and likewise of the Deities of the mountains and also of all the Deities of the river and of the sea, and setting our august spirits  on the top of thy vessel, put into gourds  the ashes of the podocarpus macrophylla tree,  and likewise make a quantity of chopsticks and also of leaf platters,  and must scatter  them all on the waves of the great sea, that thou mayest cross over." So when [she] punctually fulfilled these instructions, equipped an army, marshalled [her vessels, and crossed over, the fishes of the sea-plain, both great and small, all bore the august vessels  across their backs, and a strong favourable wind arose, and the august vessel followed the billows.

[SECT. XCVIII.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART IV.--THE EMPRESS JIN-GO CONQUERS KOREA)]

So the wave  of the august vessel pushed up onto the land of Shiragi  reaching to the middle of the country. Thereupon the chieftain  of the country, alarmed and trembling. petitioned  [the Empress], saying: "From this time forward obedient to the Heavenly Sovereign's commands, I will feed his august horses and will marshal vessels every year, nor ever let the vessels' keels  dry or their poles and oars dry, and will respectfully serve him without drawing back while heaven and earth shall last."  So therefore the Land of   was constituted the feeder of the august horses, and the Land of Kudara  was constituted the crossing store.  Then the Empress stuck her august staff on the gate of the chieftain of Shiragi, and having made the Rough August Spirits  of the Great Deities of the Inlet of Sumi  the guardian Deities of the land, she laid them to rest,  and crossed back. So while this business  was yet unconcluded, [the child] with which she was pregnant was about to be born. Forthwith, in order to restrain her august womb, she took a stone and wound it round the waist of her august skirt,  and the august child was born after she had crossed [back] to the Land of Tsukushi.  So the name by which the place was called where the  august child was born was Umi.  Again the stone which she wound round her august skirt is at the village of Ito  in the Land of Tsukushi.

[SECT. XCIX.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART V.--THE EMPRESS JIN-GO FISHES IN TSUKUSHI).]

Again when, having reached the village of Tamashima  in the Department of Matsura  in Tsukushi, she partook of an august meal on the bank of the river, it being then the first decade of the fourth moon, she then sat on a shoal  in the middle of the river, picked out threads from her august skirt, used grains of rice as bait, and hooked the trout  in the river. (The name by which the river is called is the Wo-gaha;  again the name by which the shoal is called is Kachi-do-hime. ) So down to the present time it is an uninterrupted [custom] for women in the first decade of the fourth moon to pick out threads from their skirts, use grains as bait, and hook trout.

[SECT. C.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART VI.--THE EMPRESS JIN-GO SUBDUES YAMATO).]

Hereupon, when Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi was returning up to Yamato, she, owing to doubts concerning the disposition  of the people, prepared a mourning-vessel,  set the august child in that mourning-vessel, and let a report ooze out that the august child was already dead. While she went up thus, King Kagosaka and King Oshikuma,  having heard [of the circumstance], thought to waylay  her, went forth to the moor of Toga,  and hunted for an omen. Then King Kagosaka climbed up an oak-tree,  and then  a large and angry boar came forth, dug up the oak-tree, and forthwith devoured King Kagosaka. His younger brother, King Oshikuma, undaunted by this circumstance, raised an army and lay in wait [for the Empress], to close with the mourning-vessel as being an empty  vessel. Then an army was landed from the mourning-vessel,  and joined in combat [with the opposing forces]. At this time King Oshikuma made the Noble Isahi,  ancestor of  the Kishi Clan of Naniha,  his generalissimo;  and on

the august side of the Heir Apparent His Augustness Naniha-ne-ko-take-furu-kuma,  ancestor of the Grandees of Wani,  was made generalissimo. So when [the Empress's troops] had driven [King Oshikuma's troops] as far as Yamashiro, [the latter] turned and made a stand, and both [sides] fought together without retreating. Then His Augustness Take-furu-kuma planned, and caused it to be said that, as Her Augustness Okinaga-tarashi was already dead, there was no need for further fighting,--forthwith snapping his bowstrings and feigning submission. Therefore King Oshikuma's generalissimo, believing the falsehood, unbent his bows and put away his arms. Then [the Empress's troops] picked out of their topknots some prepared bowstrings (one name [of the bowstrings] was usa-yu-dzuru; ) stretched [their bows] again, and pursued and smote [the enemy]. So [these] fled away to Afusaka,  rallied, and fought again. Then [the Empress's troops] pursued on, and defeated them, and cut to pieces that army at Sasanami.  Thereupon King Oshikuma, together with the Noble Isahi, being pursued and pressed, got on board a vessel and floated on the sea, and sang, saying:

"Come on, my lord! rather than be stricken  by Furu-kuma's hurtful hand, I will plunge like the grebe into the Sea of Afumi,--I will!"

Forthwith they plunged into the sea, and died together.

[SECT. CI.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART VIII.--THE HEIR APPARENT EXCHANGES NAMES WITH THE GREAT DEITY IZASA-WAKE).]

So when His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi, taking with him the Heir Apparent for the purpose of purification,  passed through the lands of Afumi and Wakasa,  he built a temporary palace at Tsunuga  at the mouth of the Road of Koshi  [for the Heir Apparent] to dwell in. Then His Augustness the Great Deity Izasa-wake,  who dwelt in that place, appeared at night in a dream,  and said: "I wish to exchange my name for the august name of the august child." Then [the dreamer of the dream] prayed, saying: "[I] am filled with awe!  The name shall be respectfully exchanged according to thy command." Again the Deity charged [him, saying]: "To-morrow morning [the Heir Apparent] must go out on the beach; I will present my [thank] offering for the name [given me] in exchange." So when [the Heir Apparent] went out in the morning to the beach, the  whole shore was lined with broken-nosed dolphin-fishes.  Thereupon the august child caused the Deity to be addressed, saying: "Thou bestowest on me fish of thine august food."  So again his august name was  by his being called the Great Deity of August Food. " So he is now styled the Food-Wondrous-Great-Deity.

[paragraph continues] Again the blood from the noses of the dolphin-fishes stank. So the strand was called by the name of Chiura.  it is now styled Tsunuga.

[SECT. CII.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART VIII.--THE EMPRESS JIN-GO PRESENTS LIQUOR TO THE HEIR APPARENT).]

Hereupon, when the [Heir Apparent] returned up [to the Capital], his august parent, Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi. distilled some waiting-liquor,  and presented it to him. Then his august parent sang augustly, saying:

"This august liquor is not my august liquor;--oh! it is august liquor respectfully brought as a divine congratulation, a repeated congratulation, a bountiful congratulation, a reiterated congratulation by the Small August Deity, who dwells eternally,  firmly standing. Partake not shallowly! Go on! go on!"

Having thus sung, she presented to him the great august liquor. Then His Augustness the Noble Takeuchi replied for the august child and sang, saying:

"Whatever person distilled this august liquor must surely have distilled it singing the while with that drum on the mortar,--must surely have distilled it dancing the while, for this august liquor, august liquor, to be ever more and more joyful. Go on! go on!"

These are Drinking Songs.

[SECT. CIII.--EMPEROR CHIU-AI (PART IX.--HIS DEATH AND THAT OF THE EMPRESS JIN-GO).]

Altogether the august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Tarashi-naka-tsu-hiko  were fifty-two. His august mausoleum is at Nagaye,  near Wega,  in Kafuchi. (The Empress died at the august age of one hundred. She was buried in the mausoleum of Tatanami in Saki. )

[SECT. CIV.--EMPEROR O-JIN  (PART 1.--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Homuda-wake dwelt at the palace of Akira at Karushima,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded three  queens, daughters of King Homuda-no-Ma-waka,  the name of one of whom was Her Augustness Princess Takagi-no-iri;  of the next, Her Augustness Naka-tsu-hime;  and of the next, Her Augustness Oto-hime.  (The father of these Queens, King Homuda-no-ma-Waka, was the son of His Augustness Prince Iho-ki-noiri,  by his  wife Shiritsuki-tome,  daughter of the Noble Take-inada,  ancestor of the Chiefs of Wohari.)  So the august children of Her Augustness Princess Takagi-no-iri were: His Augustness Nakuta-no-oho-waka-tsu-hiko;  next His Augustness Oho-yama-mori;  next His Augustness Iza-no-ma-waka;  next his younger sister the Lady of Ohohara;  next the Lady of Komuku.  (Five Deities). The august children of Her Augustness Naka-tsu-hime were: the Lady of Arata in Ki;  next His Augustness Oho-sazaki;  next His Augustness Netori.  (Three Deities). The august  children of Her Augustness Oto-hime were: the Lady Abe;  next the Lady of Mihara in Ahaji;  next

the Lady of Unu in Ki;  next the Lady of Minu  (five Deities).  Again he wedded the Princess Miya-nushi-ya-kaha-ye, daughter of the Grandee Wani-no-Hifure, and begot august children: Uji-no-waki-iratsuko;  next his younger sister Yata-no-waki-iratsume;  next Queen Medori.  (Three ). Again he wedded Wo-nabe-no-iratsume,  younger sister of Yakaha-ye-hime, and begot an august child: Uji-no-iratsume.  (one Deity). Again he wedded Okinaga-ma-waka-naka-tsu-hima,"  daughter of King Kuhimata-naga-hiko,  and begot an august child: King Waka-nuke-futa-mata  (one Deity). Again he wedded the Princess of Itowi,  daughter of Shima-tari-ne,  ancestor  of the Agricultural Chiefs of Sakurawi,  and begot an august child; His Augustness Hayabusa-wake  (one Deity). Again, he wedded Naga-hime of Idzumi in Himuka,  and begot august children: King Oho-haye,  next King Wo-haye;  next Hata-bi-no-waki-iratsume  (three Deities). Again he wedded Princess Ka-guro,  and begot august children: Kaha-rada-no-iratsume;  next, Tama-no-iratsume,  next, Osaka-no-oho-naka-tsu-hime;  next, Toho-hi-no-iratsume;  next, King Kataji  (five Deities). Again, he wedded Nu-iro-me of Kadzuraki,  and begot an august  child: King Iza-no-ma-waka,  (one Deity). The august children of this Heavenly Sovereign [numbered] altogether twenty-six (eleven Kings and fifteen Queens). Of these His Augustness Oho-sazaki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire.

[SECT. CV.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART II.--HE DIVIDES THE INHERITANCE BETWEEN HIS THREE SONS)]

Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign asked His Augustness Oho-yama-mori and His Augustness Oho-sazaki, saying: "Which think ye the dearer, an elder child or a younger child?" (The reason why the Heavenly Sovereign propounded this question was because it was his intention  to make Uji-no-waki-iratsuko rule the Empire). Then His Augustness Oho-yama-mori said: "The elder child is the dearer." Next His Augustness Oho-sazaki, knowing the august

feeling which made the Heavenly Sovereign deign to ask [the question], said: "The elder child, having already become a man, gives no trouble; but the younger child, not being yet a man, is the dearer." Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: "My lord Sazaki's words agree with my thoughts," and forthwith ordained the division [of the inheritance] thus: His Augustness Oho-yama-mori to administer the government of the mountains and the sea, [*2a] His Augustness Oho-sazaki to take and deign to report on the government of the realm,  and Uji-no waki-iratsuko to rule the succession of Heaven's sun.  So His Augustness Oho-sazaki was not disobedient to the Heavenly Sovereign's commands.

SECT. CVI.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART III.--HE WOOES PRINCESS MIYA-NUSHI-YA-KAHA-YE).]

One day  the Heavenly Sovereign, when he had crossed over into the land of Afumi, augustly stood on the moor of Uji, gazed on the moor of Kadzu, and sang, saying:

"As I look on the Moor of Kadzu in Chiba. both the hundred thousand-fold abundant house-places are visible, and the land's acme is visible." [*2b]

So when he reached the village of Kohara,  a beautiful maiden met him at a fork in the road, Then the Heavenly Sovereign asked the maiden, saying: "Whose child art thou?" She replied, saying: "I am the daughter of the Grandee Wani-no-Hifure,  and my name is Princess Miya-nushi-ya-kaha-ye."  The Heavenly Sovereign forthwith said to the maiden: "When I return on my progress to-morrow, I will enter into thy house." So Princess Ya-kaha-ye told her father all that [had happened]. Thereupon her father replied, saying: "Ah! it was the Heavenly Sovereign! [His commands are] to be respected. My child, respectfully serve him!"--and so saying he grandly decorated the house, and awaited [the Heaven ly Sovereign's return], whereupon he came in on the next day.  So when [the father] served [the Heavenly Sovereign] a great august feast, he made his daughter Her Augustness  Princess Ya-kaha take the great august  liquor-cup and present it. Thereupon, while taking the great liquor-cup, the Heavenly Sovereign augustly sang, saying:

"Oh this crab! whence this crab? [It is] a crab from far-distant Tsunuga. Whither  reaches its sideward motion? [It has] come towards Ichiji-shima and Mi-shima. It must be because, plunging and breathless like the grebe, I went without stopping along the up and down road by the wavelets, that the maiden I met on the Kohata road has a back oh! like a small shield, a row of teeth like acorns. Oh! the earth of the Wani pass at Ichihiwi! Owing to the skin of the first earth being ruddy, to the last  earth being of a reddish black, she, without exposing to the actual sun that makes one bend one's head the middle earth like three chestnuts, draws thickly down her drawn eye-brows;--the women I met, the child I saw and wanted in this way, the child I saw and wanted in that way, oh! she is opposite to me at the height of the feast! oh! she is at my side!"

 Ita auguste coivit [cum illa], et procreavit filium Uji-no-waki-iratsuko.

[SECT. CVII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART IV.--HE GRANTS PRINCESS KAMINAGA TO HIS SON OHO-SAZAKI).]

The Heavenly Sovereign, hearing of the beauty of Princess Kaminaga,  daughter of the Duke of Muragata  in the land of Himuka, and thinking to employ her  sent down for her,  whereupon the Heir Apparent  His Augustness Oho-sazaki, having seen the maiden land at  the port of Naniha, and being charmed with the grace of her appearance, forthwith directed the Prince Minister the Noble Taka-uchi, to intercede for him in the august presence of the Heavenly Sovereign, and make [the latter] grant to him Princess Kami-naga, whom he had sent down for. Then on the Prime Minister the Noble Take-uchi requesting the great commands,  the Heavenly Sovereign forthwith granted Princess Kami-naga to his august child. The way he granted her was this:--the Heavenly Sovereign, on a day when he partook of a copious feast,  gave Princess Kami-naga the great august liquor oak-[leaf ] to present to the Heir Apparent. Then he augustly sang, saying:

"Come on, children! oh! the fragrant flowering orange-tree on my way as I go to pluck the wild garlic,--to pluck the garlic,--has its uppermost branches withered by birds perching on them, and its lowest branches withered through people plucking from them. But the budding fruit on the middle branch, like three chestnuts,--the ruddy maiden, oh! if thou lead her off with thee, it will be good, oh!'

 Again he augustly sang, saying:

"Driving the dyke-piles into Lake Yosami  where the water collects, my heart (ignorant of the pricking of the stumps of the water-caltrop, ignorant of the creeping of the roots of the Brasenia peltata), being more and more laughable, is now indeed repentant."

Having thus sung, he bestowed [her on the Heir Apparent]. So after having been granted the maiden, the Heir Apparent sang, saying:

"Oh! the maiden of Kohada in the back of the road! though I heard of her like the thunder, we mutually intertwine [our arms] as pillows."

Again he sang saying":

"I think lovingly ah! of how the maiden  of Kohada in the back of the road sleeps [with me] without disputing"

[SECT. CVIII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART V.--SONGS OF THE TERRITORIAL OWNERS OF YESHINU).]

Again, the Territorial Owners of Yeshinu,  seeing the august sword which was girded on His Augustness Oho sazaki, sang, saying:

"Sharp is the beginning, freezing is the end of the sword girded on Oho-sazaki, Oho, sazaki, the solar august child of Homuda,--[it is] chilly, chilly like the trees beneath the trunks of the winter trees."

Again, having made a cross-mortar  at Kashifu  in  Yeshinu, and having in that cross-mortar distilled  some great august liquor, they, when they presented the great august liquor [to the Heavenly Sovereign], sang as follows, drumming with their mouths:

"We have made a side-mortar at Kashinofu, and in the side-mortar we have distilled some great august liquor, which do thou sweetly partake of, oh our lord!"

This Song is one which it is the custom to chant down to the present day when, from time to time, the Territorial Owners present a great feast [to the Sovereign].

[SECT. CIX.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART VI.--VARIOUS DEEDS)]

In this august reign were graciously established the Fisher Tribe,  the Mountain Tribe,  the Mountain Warden Tribe,  and the Ise Tribe.  Again the Pool of Tsurugi was made. Again there came over [to Japan] some

people from Shiragi. Therefore His Augustness the Noble Take-uchi, having taken them with him and set them to labour on pools and embankments, made the Pool of Kudara. [*5a]

[SECT. CX.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART VIII.--TRIBUTE FROM KOREA).]

Again King Sho-ko,  the Chieftain of the land of Kudara, sent as tribute by Achi-kishi  one stallion and one mare. (This Achi-kishi was the ancestor of the Achiki Scribes. ) Again he sent as tribute a cross-sword,  and likewise a large mirror. Again he was graciously bidden [*5b] to send as tribute a wise man, if there were any such in the land of Kudara. Therefore receiving the [Imperial] commands, he sent as tribute a man named Wani-kishi,  and likewise by this man he sent as tribute the Confucian Analects  in ten volumes and the Thousand Character Essay  in one volume,--altogether eleven volumes.

[paragraph continues]  (This Wani-kishi was the ancestor of the Fumi Grandees.)  Again he sent as tribute two artisans,--a smith from Kara named Taku-so  and a weaver from Go  named Sai-so.

[SECT. CXI.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART VIII.--THE EMPEROR INTOXICATED).]

Again there came over [to Japan] the ancestor of the Hada Rulers,  the ancestor of the Aya Suzerains,  and likewise a man who knew how to distil liquor, and whose name was Nim-pan,  while another name for him was Susukori.  So this [man] Susukori distilled some great august liquor, and presented it to the Heavenly Sovereign, who, excited with the great august liquor that had been presented to him augustly sang, saying:

"I have become intoxicated with the august liquor distilled by Susukori. I have become intoxicated with the soothing liquor, with the smiling liquor."

On his walking out singing thus, he hit with his  august staff a large stone in the middle of the Ohosaka  road, upon which the stone ran away. So the proverb says: "Hard stones get out of a drunkard's way."

[SECT. CXII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART IX.--TROUBLES WHICH FOLLOWED HIS DECEASE)]

So after the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign, His Augustness Ohosazaki, in conformity with the Heavenly Sovereign's commands, ceded the Empire to Uji-no-waki-iratsuko. Thereupon His Augustness Ohoyama-mori, disobeying the Heavenly Sovereign's commands, and anxious in spite thereof to obtain the Empire, had the design to slay the Prince  his younger brother, secretly raised an army, and prepared to attack him. Then His Augustness Oho-sazaki, hearing that his elder brother had prepared an army, forthwith despatched a messenger to apprise Uji-no-waki-iratsuko. So, startled at the news, [the latter] set troops in ambush by the river-bank, and likewise, after having drawn a fence of curtains and raised a tent on the top of the hill, placed there publicly on a throne  one of his retainers to pretend that he was the King,  the manner in which all the officials  reverentially went and came being just like that [usual] in the King's presence. And moreover, preparing for the time  when the King his elder brother  should cross the river, he arranged and decorated a boat and oars, and moreover  ground [in a mortar] the root of the Kadzura japonica, and having taken the slime of its juice, rubbed

therewith the grating  inside the boat, so as to make any who should tread on it fall down, and then himself  put on a cloth coat and trowsers, and having assumed the appearance of a common fellow, stood in the boat holding the oar. Hereupon, when the King his elder brother, having hid his troops in ambush and put on armour beneath his clothes, reached the river-bank and was about to get into the boat, he gazed at the grandly decorated place [on the hill], thought the King his younger brother was sitting on the throne, being altogether ignorant [of the fact] that he was standing in the boat holding the oar, and forthwith asked the fellow who was holding the oar, saying: "It has been reported to me that on this mountain there is a large and angry boar. I wish to take that boar. Shall I peradventure get that boar? "Then the fellow holding the oar replied, saying: "Thou canst not." Again he asked, saying: "For what reason?" [The boat-man] answered, saying: "He is not to be got, however often and in however many places he be chased. Wherefore I say that thou canst not [catch him either]. "When they had crossed as far as the middle of the river, [Prince Uji-no-waki-iratsuko] caused the boat to be tilted over, and [his elder brother] to fall into the water.  Then forthwith he rose to the surface, and floated down with the current. Forthwith, as he floated, he sang, saying:

"Whoever is swiftest among the boatmen of the Uji ferry will come to me."'

Thereupon the troops that had been hidden on the  river-bank rose up simultaneously on this side and on that side, and fixing their arrows [in their bows], let him go floating down. So he sank on reaching Kawara

[paragraph continues] Point.  So on their searching with hooks  the place where he had sunk, [the hooks] struck on the armour inside his clothes, and made a rattling sound.  So the place was called by the name of Kawara Point. Then when they hooked up  his bones, the younger King, sang saying:

"Catalpa bow, Evonymus standing by the ferry-bank of Uji! My heart had thought to cut [you], my heart had thought to take [you]; but at the base methought of the lord, at the extremity methought of the younger sister; grievously methought of this, sorrowfully methought of, that; and I came [back] without cutting it,--the Catalpa bow, the Evonymus."

 So the bones of His Augustness Oho-yama-mori were buried on the Nara  mountain. His Augustness Oho-yama-mori (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Hijikata,  the Dukes of Heki,  and the Dukes of Harihara. )

[SECT. CXIII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART X.--PRINCES OHO-SAZAKI AND UJI-NO-WAKI-IRATSUKO CEDE THE EMPIRE TO EACH OTHER)]

Thereupon while the two Deities  His Augustness Oho-sazaki and Uji-no-waki-iratsuko were, each of them, ceding the Empire to the other,  a fisherman  came with a great feast as tribute.  So they each resigned it to the other. So the elder brother refused it, and caused  it to be offered to the younger brother, and the younger brother refused it, and caused it to be offered to the elder brother, during which mutual cedings many days elapsed. As such mutual ceding took place not [only] once or twice, the fisherman wept from the fatigue of going backwards and forwards. So the proverb says:

[paragraph continues] "Ah! the fisherman weeps on account of his own things." [*5a] Meanwhile Uji-no-waki-iratsuko died early.  So His Augustness Oho-sazaki did rule the Empire.

[SECT. CXIV.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART XI.--AMA-NO-HI-BOKO CROSSES OVER TO JAPAN)]

Moreover of old there had been [a man] called by the name of Ama-no-hi-boko,  child of the ruler of the land of Shiragi. This person crossed over here [to Japan]. The reason of his crossing over here was [this]: In the land of Shiragi there was a certain lagoon,  called by the name of the Agu Lagoon.  On the bank of this lagoon  a certain poor girl was [taking her] midday sleep. Tunc solis radii, coelesti arcui similes, in privatas partes impegerunt. Again there was a certain poor man,  who, thinking this occurrence [*5b] strange, constantly watched the woman's behaviour. So the woman, having conceived from the time of that midday sleep, gave birth to

a red jewel. Then the poor man who had watched her begged [to be allowed] to take the jewel, and kept it constantly wrapped up by his side.  This person, having planted a rice-field in a valley,  had loaded a cow  with food for the labourers, and was getting into the middle of the valley, when he met the ruler's son, Ama-no-hi-boko, who thereupon asked him, saying: "Why enterest thou the valley with a load of food upon a cow? Thou wilt surely kill this cow and eat her." Forthwith he seized the man and was about to put him into prison, when the man replied, saying: "I was not going to kill the cow. I was simply taking food to the people in the fields." But still [the ruler's child] would not let him go. 'Then he undid the jewel [which hung] at his side, and [therewith] bribed [the ruler's child]. So [the latter] let the poor man go, brought the jewel [home], and placed it beside his couch. Forthwith it was trans-formed into a beautiful maiden, whom he straightway wedded, and made his chief wife. Then the maiden perpetually prepared all sorts of dainties with which she constantly fed her husband. So the ruler's child [grew] proud in his heart, and reviled his wife. But the woman said: "I am not a woman who ought to be the wife of such as thou. I will go to the land of my ancestors;"--and forthwith she secretly embarked in a boat, and fled away across here [to Japan], and landed  at Naniha.  (This is the deity called Princess Akaru,  who dwells in the shrine of Hime-goso  at Naniha.) Thereupon Ame-no-hi-boko, hearing  of his wife's flight, forthwith pursued her across hither, and was about to arrive at Naniha, when the Deity of the passage  prevented his entrance. So he went back again, and landed in the country of Tajima.

[SECT. CXV.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART XII.--DESCENDANTS OF AMA-NO-HI-BOKO, AND TREASURES BROUGHT BY HIM.)]

Forthwith staying in that country, he wedded Saki-tsu-mi,  daughter of Tajima-no-matawo,  and begot a child: Tajima-morosuku.  The latter's child was Tajima-hi-ne.  The latter's child was Tajima-hinaraki.  The

latter's children were Tajima-mori,  next Tajima-hitaka,  next Kiyo-hiko  (three Deities).  This Kiyo-hiko wedded Tagima-no-mehi,  and begot children: Suga-no-morowo,  next his younger sister Suga-kama-yura-domi.  So the above mentioned Tajima-hitaka wedded his niece Yura-domi, and begot a child: Her Augustness Princess Takanuka of Kadzuraki.  (This was the august parent  of Her Augustness Princess Okinaga-tarashi.) So the things which Ama-no-hi-boko brought over here, and which were called the "precious treasures,"  were: two strings of pearls:  likewise a wave-shaking scarf, a wave-cutting scarf, a wind-shaking scarf, and a wind-cutting scarf;  likewise a mirror of the offing and a mirror of the shore, --eight articles in all. (These are the Eight Great Deities of Idzushi.)

[SECT. CXVI.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART XIII.--THE YOUTH-OF-THE-GLOW-ON-THE-AUTUMN-MOUNTAINS AND THE YOUTH-OF-THE-HAZE-ON-THE-SPRING-MOUNTAINS).]

So this Deity had a daughter whose name was the Deity Maiden-of-Idzushi.  So eighty Deities wished to  obtain this Maiden-of-Idzushi in marriage, but none of them could do so.  Hereupon there were two Deities, brothers, of whom the elder was called the Youth-of-the-Glow-on-the-Autumn-Mountains,  and the younger was named the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains.  So the elder brother said to the younger brother: "Though I beg for  the Maiden of Idzushi, I cannot obtain her in marriage. Wilt thou [be able] to obtain her?" He answered, saying: "I will easily obtain her." Then the elder brother said: "If thou shalt obtain this maiden, I will take off my upper and lower garments, and distil liquor in a jar of my own height,  and prepare all the things of the mountains and of the rivers  [and give them to thee] in payment of the wager." Then the younger brother told his mother everything that the elder brother had said. Forthwith the mother, having taken wistaria-fibre, wove and sewed in the space of a single night an upper garment and trowsers, and also socks and boots, and likewise made a bow and arrows, and clothed him in this upper garment, trowsers,  etc., made him take the bow and arrows, and sent him to the maiden's house, where both his apparel and the bow and arrows all turned into wistaria-blossoms. Thereupon the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains hung up the bow and arrows in the maiden's privy. Then, when the Maiden-of-Idzushi, thinking the blossoms strange, brought them [home, the Youth-of-the-Haze-on-the-Spring-Mountains]

followed behind the maiden into the house, and forthwith wedded her. So she gave birth to a child.  Then he spoke to his elder brother, saying: "I have obtained the Mayden-of-Idzushi." Thereupon the elder brother, vexed that the younger brother should have wedded her, did not pay the things he had wagered. Then when [the younger brother] complained to his mother, his august parent replied, saying: "During my august life the Deities indeed are to be well imitated; moreover it must be because he imitates mortal men  that he does not pay those things." Forthwith, in her anger with her elder child, she took a jointed bamboo  from an island in the River Idzushi, and made a coarse basket with eight holes,  and took stones from the river, and mixing them with brine, wrapped them in the leaves of the bamboo  and caused this curse to be spoken:  "Like unto the becoming green of these bamboo-leaves, [do thou] become green and wither!  Again, like unto the flowing and ebbing of this brine  [do thou] flow and ebb! Again, like unto the sinking of these stones, [do thou] sink and be prostrate! "Having caused this curse to be spoken, she placed [the basket] over the smoke.  Therefore the elder brother dried up, withered, sickened, and lay prostrate  for the space of eight years. So on the elder brother entreating his august parent with lamentations and fears, she forthwith caused the curse to be reversed.  Thereupon his body became sound  as it had been before. (This is the origin of the term "a divine wager payment.")

[SECT. CXVII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART XVI.--GENEALOGIES).]

Again this Heavenly Sovereign Homuda's  august child King Wake-nuke-futa-mata wedded his mother's younger sister Momo-shiki-iro-be,  another name for whom was Her Augustness Oto-hime-ma-wake-hime,  and begot children: Oho-iratsuko,  another name for whom  was King Ohohodo;  next her Augustness Osaka-no-oho-naka-tsu-hime:

next Tawi-no-naka-tsu-hime;  next Tamiya-no-naka-tsu-hime;  next Fujihara-no-koto-fushi-no-ira-tsume;  next Queen Torime;  next King Sane.  (Seven Kings (and Queens). ) So King Oho-hodo (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Mikuni,  the Dukes of Hata,  the Dukes of Okinaga,  the Dukes of Sakahito of Sakata,  the Dukes of Yamaji,  the Dukes of  Meta in Tsukushi,  and the Dukes of Fuse.)  Again King Netori wedded his younger half-sister the Lady Mihara, and begot children: King Naka-tsu-hiko;  next King Iwa-shiha  (Two Kings.) Again the child of King Kata-shiha  was King Kuni.

[SECT. CXVIII.--EMPEROR O-JIN (PART XV.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The august years of this Heavenly Sovereign Homuda were altogether one hundred and thirty. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Mofusu  at Wega in Kafuchi.

VOL. III.

[SECT. CXIX.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART I.--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Oho-sazaki dwelt in the palace of Takatsu  at Naniha, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded (the Empress ) Her Augustness Iha-no-hime,  daughter of Kadzuraki-no-sotsu-biko,  and begot august children: His Augustness Ohoye-no-izaho-wake;  next the Middle King of the Inlet of Sumi;  next His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake of Tajihi;  next His Augustness the Noble Wo-asadzuma-no-waku-go  (four Deities.) Again he wedded Princess Kami-naga, daughter of the Duke of Muragata in Himuka, as mentioned above,  and begot august children: Hatabi-no-oho-iratsuko,  another  name for whom was the King of Great Kusaka;  next Hatabi-no-waki-iratsume,  another name for whom was Her Augustness Princess Nagahi,  and another name was Her Augustness Waka-kusaka-be (Two Deities.) Again he wedded his younger half-sister Yata-no-waki-iratsume  Again he wedded his younger half-sister Uji-no-waki-iratsume. These two Deities had no august children. Altogether the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign Oho-sakaki [numbered] in all six Deities, (Five Kings and one Queen). So His Augustness Izaho-wake [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Tajihi-no midzu-ha-wake likewise ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness the Noble Oh-asadzuma-no-waku-go likewise ruled the Empire.

[SECT. CXX: EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART II.--VARIOUS DEEDS).]

In the august reign of this Heavenly Sovereign the Kadzuraki Tribe  was established as the august proxy of the Empress, Her Augustness Iha-no-hime. Again the Mibu

[paragraph continues] Tribe  was established as the august proxy of the Heir Apparent, His Augustness Izaho-wake. Again the Tajihi Tribe  was established as the august proxy of His Augustness Midzuna-wake. Again the Oho-kusaka Tribe  was  established as the august proxy of King Oho-kusaka, and the Waka-kusaka Tribe  was established as the august proxy of King Waga-kusake-be. Again people from Hada were set to labour, and the embankment at Mamuta  and also the granaries of Manuta were made. Again the Pool of Wani  and the Pool of Yosemi were made. Again the Naniha Channel  was dug, and [the waters of the rivers] led to the sea. Again the Wobashi Channel  was dug. Again the port of the inlet of Sumi  was established.

[SECT. CXXI.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU [PART III.--HE REMITS THE TAXES)]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, ascending a lofty mountain and looking on the land all round, spoke, saying: "In the whole land there rises no smoke; the land is all poverty-stricken. So I remit  all people's taxes and [forced labour] from now till three years [hence.]" Therefore the great palace became dilapidated, and the rain leaked in everywhere; but no repairs were made. The rain that leaked in was caught in troughs,  and [the inmates] removed from [its reach] to places where there was no leakage. When later [the Heavenly Sovereign]] looked on all the land, the smoke was abundant in the land. So finding the people rich, he now exacted taxes and forced labour. Therefore the peasantry  prospered, and did not suffer from forced labour. So in praise of that august reign, it was called the reign of the Emperor-Sage.

[SECT. .--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART IV.--HE LOVES PRINCESS KURO).]

His Empress, Her Augustness Iha-no-hime, was exceedingly jealous. So the concubines employed by the Heavenly Sovereign could not even peep inside the palace; and if anything happened,  [the Empress] stamped with jealousy. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, hearing of the regular beauty of Princess Kuro,  daughter of the Suzerain of Ama in Kibi,  and having sent for her, employed her. But she, afraid of the Empress's jealousy, fled down to her native land, The Heavenly  Sovereign, gazing from an upper story upon Princess Kuro's departure by boat upon the sea, sang saying:

"In the offing there are rows of small boats. My wife Masadzuko of Kurozaki goes down towards her [native] land."

So the Empress was very angry on hearing this august Song, and sent people to the great strand  to drive Princess Kuro ashore, and chase her away on foot.  Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, for love of Princess Kuro, deceived the Empress, saying that he wanted to see the Island of Ahaji.  And when he made his progress

and was in the Island of Ahaji, he, gazing afar, sang saying:

"When, having departed from the point of wave-beaten Naniha, I look at the country,--the Island of Aha, the Is-land of Onogoro, and also the Island of Ajimasa are visible. The Island of Saketsu is visible."

Forthwith passing on from that island, he made a progress to the land of Kibi. Then Her Augustness Princess Kuro- made him grandly reside at a place among the mountain-fields,  and presented to him great august food, When for this [purpose] she plucked cabbage in that place to boil into great august soup, the Heavenly Sovereign went to the place where the maiden was plucking the cabbage, and sang, saying:

"Oh! how delightful it is to pluck with a person of Kibi the cabbage sown in the mountain fields!"

When the Heavenly Sovereign made his progress up,

Princess Kuro presented an august  Song saying:

"Even though the west wind blow up towards Yamato, and the clouds part, and we be separated, shall I forget [thee]?"

 Again she sang, saying:

"Whose spouse is it that goes towards Yamato? Whose spouse is it that creeps from beneath like hidden water?"

[SECT. CXXIII. EMPEROR NIN-TOKU PART V.--THE EMPRESS RETIRES TO YAMASHIRO).]

After this time the Empress made a progress to the land of Ki in order to pluck aralia-leaves for a copious feast;  and in the mean while the Heavenly Sovereign wedded Yata-no-waki-iratsume. Hereupon, when the Empress was returning in her august vessel loaded full

of aralia-leaves, a coolie from Kozhima  in the land of Kibi, who was in the service of the Superintendent of the Water-Directors,  being on his way off to his own country, met at the great passage  of Naniha the vessel of a lady of the train  who had got behind, and forthwith told her, saying: "The Heavenly Sovereign has  recently  wedded Yata-no-waki-iratsume, and plays with her day and night. It must probably be because the Empress has not heard of this thing, that she quietly makes progress for pleasure." Then the lady of the train, having heard this narrative, forthwith pursued and reached the august vessel, and reported everything exactly as the coolie had told it. Hereupon the Empress, greatly vexed and angry, threw away into the sea all the aralia-leaves which she had put on board the august vessel. So the place,[where she did so] is called by the name of Cape Mitsu.  Forthwith without entering the palace, but taking her august vessel [from it]  and ascending the channel  against the current, she made a progress up into Yamashiro by the river;  At this time she sang, saying:

"Oh! the river of Yamashiro where the seedlings grow in succession! As I ascend, ascend the river, oh! on the bank of the river [there] stands growing a sashibu!--a sashibu-tree; below it stands growing a broad-foliaged five hundred[-fold branching] true camellia-tree; oh! he who is brilliant like its blossoms, widely powerful like its foliage, is the great lord."

Forthwith going round by Yamashiro,  and arriving at  the entrance of the  Mountain,  she sang, saying:

"Oh! the river of Yamashiro where the seedlings grow in succession! As I ascend, ascend to Miya, I pass Nara, I pass Yamato with its shield of mountains; and the country I fain would see is Takamiya in Kadzuraki, the neighbourhood of my home."

 Having sung thus, she returned and entered for some time into the house of a person from Kara  named Nurinomi  at Tsutsuki.

[SECT. CXXIV.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART VI.--HE FOLLOWS THE EMPRESS INTO YAMASHIRO).]

The Heavenly Sovereign, having heard that the Empress had made a progress up by Yamashiro, made a person,--a retainer called by the name of Toriyama, --give an august Song,  which said:

"Reach [her] in Yamashiro, Toriyama! Reach [her]! reach [her]! Ah! wilt thou reach and meet my beloved spouse?"

Again he continued by despatching Kuchiko, Grandee of Wani,  and sang, saying:

"Wilt thou be without thinking even of the Heart that is in the moor of Ohowiko, the moor of Ohowiko, that is by Takaki at Mimoro?"

Again he sang, saying:

"If indeed I had pillowed [my head] on the white arm like the whiteness of the roots, the great roots, that were beaten with wooden hoes by the women of Yamashiro where the seedlings grow in succession, [then] mightest thou say, 'I know [thee] not'."

So when the Grandee of Kuchiko was repeating this  august Song [to the Empress,] it was raining heavily. Then upon his, without avoiding the rain, coming and prostrating himself at the front door of the palace,  she on the contrary went out at the back door; and on his coming and prostrating himself at the back door of the palace, she on the contrary went out at the front door. Then, as he crept backwards and forwards on his knees in the middle of the court, the streams of water  reached to his loins. Owing to the grandee being clad in a garment dyed  green and with a red cord, the streams of water brushed against the red cord, and the green all changed to red colour. Now the Grandee of Kuchiko's younger sister Princess Kuchi  was in the service of the Empress.  So Princess Kuchi sang saying:

"Oh! how tearful is my lord-elder brother, saying things in the palace of Tsutsuki in Yamashiro!"

Then when the Empress asked the reason,  she replied, saying: "He is my brother the Grandee of Kuchiko." Thereupon the Grandee of Kuchiko and also his younger sister Princess Kuchi and likewise Nurinomi [all] three took counsel [together,] and sent to report to the Heavenly  Sovereign, saying: "The reason of the Empress's progress is that there are [some] insects reared by Nurinomi,--strange insects changing in three ways,  once becoming creeping insects, once becoming cocoons,  and once becoming flying birds --and it is only to go and look at them that she has entered into [Nurinomi's house.] She has no strange intentions."  When they had thus reported, the Heavenly Sovereign said: "That being so, I want to go and see [these insects,] as

[paragraph continues] I think [they must be] strange; [and with these words] he made a progress up from the great palace. When he entered into Nurinomi's house, Nurinomi, had already presented to the Empress the three-fold insects reared by him. Then the Heavenly Sovereign augustly stood at the door of the palace where the Empress-dwelt, and sang, saying:

"Pure as the great roots that were beaten with their wooden hoes by the women of Yamashiro where the seedings grow in succession:--it is because thou spokest tumultuously that I come in here [with my retainers numerous] as the more and more flourishing trees that I look across at."

 These six Songs by the Heavenly Sovereign and by the Empress are Changing Songs which are Quiet Songs.

[SECT. CXXV.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART VIII.--HE LOVES YATA-NO-WAKI-IRATSUME).]

The Heavenly Sovereign, loving Yata-no-waki-iratsume, deigned to send her an august Song. That Song said:

"Will the one sedge-stem of Yata, having no children, wither as it stands? Poor sedge-moor! Sedge-moor indeed is what I may say--poor pure girl!"

Then Yata-no-waki-iratsume replied in a Song, saying:

"Even though the one sedge stem of Yata be alone, if the Great Lord say it is right even though it be alone [it is right.]"

So the Yata Tribe  was established as the august proxy of Yata-no-waki-iratsume.

[SECT. CXXVI.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART VIII.--DEATH OF KING HAYABUSA-WAKE AND QUEEN MEDORI).]

Again the Heavenly Sovereign begged for his younger half-sister Queen Medori, using as middle-man his younger brother King Haya-busa-wake. Then Queen Medori  spoke to King Hayabusa-wake, saying: "Owing to the

violence of the Empress, [the Heavenly Sovereign] has not deigned to take Yata-no-waki-iratsume [into the Palace.] So I will not respectfully serve him. I will become the wife of Thine Augustness." Forthwith they wedded each other, wherefore King Hayabusa-wake made no report [to the Heavenly Sovereign. ] Then the Heavenly Sovereign, going straight to the place where Queen Medori dwelt, stood on the door-sill of the palace. Hereupon, Queen Medori being at her loom, was weaving garments. Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang saying:

"Oh! for whom may be the garments that my Great Lady Medori weaves?"

Queen Medori replied in a Song saying:

"For an august veil for the high-going Falcon-Lord."

So the Heavenly Sovereign, perceiving her feelings, returned into the palace. At this time  when her husband King Hayabusa-wake came, his wife Queen Medori sang, saying:

"The lark flies to heaven. Oh! high-going Falcon-Lord, catch the wren."

 The Heavenly Sovereign, hearing this Song,  forthwith raised an army, wishing to slay King Hayabusa and Queen Medori, who then fled away together, and ascended Mount Kurahashi.  Thereupon King Hayabusa-wake sang, saying:

"Owing to the steepness of ladder-like Mount Kurahashi, being unable to clamber [up] the rocks, oh! she takes my hand!

Again he sang, saying:

"Though ladder-like Mount Kurahashi be  steep, it is not steep when I ascend it with my younger sister."

So when they fled thence, and reached Soni in Uda,  the Imperials  army pursued, overtook, and slew them.

[SECT. CXXVII.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART VIII.--QUEEN MEDORI'S ARMLET).]

Chief Ohotate of Yamabe,  who was the generalissimo of that army, took the jewelled armlet which was wound round Queen Medori's august arm, and gave it to his own wife. After this time, when a copious feast  was to be held, the women of the various families all went to court. Then the wife of Chief Ohotate came with that Queen's jewelled armlet wound round her own arm.  Thereupon the Empress, Her Augustness Iha-no-hime, herself took the oak-leaves  [full] of great august liquor and graciously gave them to the women of the various families. Then the Empress, recognizing the jewelled armlet, gave [the wearer] no oak-leaf[-full] of great august liquor, but forthwith sent her away;  and sending. for the husband, Chief Ohotate, said: "Owing to that King and Queen's impropriety, [the Emperor] deigned to send them away. This was nothing strange. And a slave such as thou despoils of the jewelled armlet that was wound round her august arm the body of his lady [that was still] warm, and gives it to his own wife!"--and forthwith he was condemned to death.

[SECT. CXXVIII.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART IX.--A WILD-GOOSE LAYS AN EGG).]

Another time, the Heavenly Sovereign, when about to hold a copious feast,  made a progress to the Island of Hime,  just when a wild-goose had laid an egg on that island. Then, sending for His Augustness the Noble Takeuchi, he asked him in a Song about the laying of an egg by a wild goose. This Song said:

"Court Noble of Uchi! thou indeed art a long-lived person. Hast thou [ever] heard of a wild-goose laying an egg in the land of Yamato?"

Hereupon the Noble Take-uchi spoke in a song, saying:

"August Child of the high-shining Sun, it is indeed natural that thou shouldest deign to ask, it is indeed right that thou shouldest ask. I indeed am a long-lived person, [but] have not yet heard of a wild goose laying an egg in the land of Yamato."

Having thus spoken, he was granted the august  lute and sang saying:

"Oh thou prince! the wild goose must have laid the egg because thou wilt at last rule."

This is a Congratulatory Incomplete Song.

[SECT. CXXIX:--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART X.--A VESSEL IS MADE INTO A LUTE)]

In this august reign there was a tall tree on the west of the river Tsuki.  The shadow of this tree, on its being struck by the morning sun, reached to the Island of Ahaji:  and on its being struck by the evening sun, it crossed Mount Takayasu.  So the tree was cut down and made into a vessel, and a very swift-going vessel it was. At the time, this vessel was called by the name of Karanu.  So with this vessel the water of the Island of Ahaji was drawn morning and evening, and presented as the great august water.  The broken [pieces] of this vessel were used [as fuel] to burn salt and the pieces of wood that remained over from the burning were made into a lute, whose sound re-echoed seven miles  [off]. So [some one ] sang, saying:

"Karanu was burnt [as fuel] for salt; the remainder was made into a lute; oh! when struck, it sounds like the wet plants standing rocked on the reefs in the middle of the harbour, the harbour of Yura."

This is a Changing Song which is a Quiet song.

[SECT. CXXX.--EMPEROR NIN-TOKU (PART XI.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The august years of this Heavenly Sovereign were eighty-three. His august mausoleum is on the Ear-Moor of Mozu.

[SECT. CXXXI.--EMPEROR RI-CHIU (PART I.--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Iza-ho-wake dwelt in the palace of Wakasakura at Ihare,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Princess Kuro,  daughter of the Noble of Ashida,  child of So-tsu-biko  of Kadzuraki,  and begot august children: King Oshiha of Ichinobe;  next King Mima:  next his younger sister Awomi-no-iratsume,  another name for whom was Ichi-toyo-no-iratsume.

[SECT. CXXXII.--EMPEROR RI-CHIU (PART II.--HE IS TAKEN TO ISO-NO-KAMI).]

Originally, when dwelling at the palace of Naniha, [the Heavenly Sovereign] on holding a copious feast when at the great tasting,  was intoxicated with the great august liquor, and fell greatly and augustly asleep. Then his younger brother, King Sumi-no-ye-naka-tsu, wishing to take the Heavenly Sovereign, set fire to the great palace. Thereupon the Suzerain of Achi,  ancestor of the Suzerains of Aya  in Yamato, having taken him away by stealth, set him on an august horse, and caused him to make a progress into Yamato. So [the Heavenly Sovereign] awoke on reaching the moor of Tajihi,  and said: "What place is this?" Then the Suzerain of Achi said: "King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu set fire to the great palace; so I am fleeing with thee into Yamato." Then the Sovereign sang, saying:

"Had I known that I should sleep on the Moor of Tajihi, oh! I would have brought my dividing matting, had I known that I should sleep!"

On reaching the Pass of Hanifu  and gazing at the palace of Naniha, the fire was still bright. Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang again, saying:

"The group of houses sparklingly burning, as I stand and look from the Pass of Hanifu, is in the direction of the house of my spouse."

So when they reached the entrance of the Ohosaka mountain,  they met one woman. This woman said: "A number of men bearing weapons are barring [the

way across] the mountain. Thou shouldst cross it going round by way of Tagima.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

"Oh! on asking the way of the maiden we met at Ohosaka, she tells not [the] direct [way], but tells of the Tagima way."

So making his progress up, he dwelt in the temple of  the Deity of Isonokami.

[SECT. CXXXIII.--EMPEROR.--RI-CHIU (PART III.--HIS REBELLIOUS BROTHER AND THE LATTER'S RETAINER SOBAKARI ARE SLAIN)]

Thereupon his younger brother His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake came,  sent [to ask for] an audience.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign caused him to be told [these words]: As I am in doubt whether perhaps Thine Augustness may [not] be of like mind  with King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, I will not meet and speak with thee." [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] replied, saying: "I have no evil intent. I am not of like mind with King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu." [The Heavenly Sovereign] again caused him to be told [these words]: "If that be so, [do thou] now return down, and slay King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, and come up [again hither]. At that time I will surely meet and speak with thee." So he forthwith returned down to Naniha, and deceived [a man] named Sobakari,  a man-at-arms  in the personal service of  King Sumi-no-ye-no-naka-tsu, saying: "If thou wilt obey my words, I shall become Heavenly Sovereign, and will make thee prime Minister, to rule the Empire.  How [would this be]?" Sobakari replied, saying "" [I  will do] according to thy command." Then plenteously endowing that man-at-arms, he said: "If that be so,

slay the King." Thereupon Sobakari watched for the time when his King went into the privy, and thrust him to death with a spear. So when [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] was making his progress to Yamato taking Sobakari with him, he, on reaching the entrance of the Ohosaka mountain, thought [thus]: "Although Sobakari deserves very well of me, he has truly  slain his lord. This is unrighteous. Nevertheless if I reward not his deed, I may be called untruthful; and if I quite carry out my promise, his intentions are on the contrary to be feared. So, though recompensing his deed, I will destroy his actual person." Therefore he said to Sobakari: "I will halt here to-day and bestow on thee the rank of Prime Minister, and to-morrow will [continue my] progress up." So a halt was made at the entrance to the mountain, a temporary palace forthwith built, a copious feast  suddenly held, the rank of Prime Minister forthwith bestowed on the man-at-arms, and all the officials  made to do obeisance [to him]. The man-at-arms, delighted, thought that he had accomplished his design. Then [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] said to the man-at-arms: "To-day I will drink liquor from the same cup as the Prime Minister." And when they drank together, a bowls large [enough] to hide the face was filled with the liquor presented.  Hereupon the King's child drank first, and the man-at-arms drank afterwards. So when the man-at-arms was drinking, the great cup covered his face. Then [His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake] drew forth a sabre which he had laid under the matting, and cut off the head of the man-at-arms. Forthwith on the morrow he made his progress up. So the place was called by the name of Chika-tsu-Asuka.

[paragraph continues]   Going up and reaching Yamato, he said: "I will halt here to-day and, having purified myself, will go forth to-morrow and worship at the temple of the Deity."  So that place is called by the name of Toho-tsu-Asuka.  So going forth to the temple of the Deity of Iso-no-kami , he sent to report to the Heavenly Sovereign that he had come up to serve him after accomplishing the work [with which he had been entrusted].  So [the Heavenly Sovereign] sent for, and met, and spoke with him.

[SECT. CXXXIV.--EMPEROR RI-CHIU (PART IV.--VARIOUS DEEDS).]

The Heavenly Sovereign thereupon first appointed the Suzerain of Achi to the office of Treasurer,  and likewise bestowed on him domains.  Again in this august reign the name of Waka-sakura Tribe  was granted to the Grandees of the Waka-sakura Tribe.  Again the gentile name  of Dukes of Himeda  was granted to the Dukes of Himeda. Again the Ihare Clan  was established.

[SECT. CXXXV.--EMPEROR RI-CHIU (PART V.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were sixty-four. His august mausoleum is at Mozu. [*1a]

[SECT. CXXXV.--EMPEROR HAN-ZEI.]

His Augustness Midzu-ha-wake dwelt in the palace of Shibakaki at Tajihi,  and ruled the Empire. The length of this Heavenly sovereign's august person was nine feet two inches and a half.  The length of his august teeth was one inch, and their breadth two lines, and the upper and lower [row] corresponded exactly, [like jewels strung together]. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Lady of Tsunu,  daughter of Kogoto, Grandee of Wani,  and begot august children: the Lady of Kahi;  next the Lady of Tsubura  (two Deities). Again he wedded Oto-hime,  daughter of the same Grandee, and begot august children: King Takara;  next the Lady of Takabe. ---altogether four Kings [and Queens].  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were sixty. His august mausoleum is on the Moor of Mozu.

[SECT. CXXXVII.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO  (PART I--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Wo-asa-dzu-ma-waku-go-no-sukune dwelt in the Palace of Toho-tsu-Asuka,  and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign wedded Her Augustness Osaka-no-oho-naka-tsu-hime,  younger sister of King Oho-hodo, and begot august children: King Karu of Kinashi;  next Nagata-no-oho-iratsume;  next King Kurohiko of Sakahi;  next His Augustness Anaho;  next Karu-no-oho-iratsume  another name for whom is Sotohoshi-no-iratsume.  (the reason for her being given the august name of Queen So-tohoshi was that the refulgence of her person passed through her garments); next King Shiro-biko of Yatsuri;  next His Augustness  Oho-hatsuse:  (nine Deities). Altogether the Heavenly Sovereign's august children [numbered] nine Deities--(five Kings and four Queens). Of these nine Kings and

[paragraph continues] Queens, His Augustness Anaho  [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. Next his Augustness Oho-hatsuse  ruled the Empire.

[SECT. CXXXVIII.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART II.--HIS SICKNESS IS CURED BY A KOREAN PHYSICIAN).]

The Heavenly Sovereign, when first about to rule the succession of Heaven's Sun, [*1a] declined, saying: "I have a long sickness; I cannot rule the sun's succession." Nevertheless, as from the Empress downwards all the magnates strongly urged him, he forthwith ruled the Empire. At this time the ruler of Shiragi [*2a] dutifully sent eighty-one vessels with august tribute. Then the chief envoy  sent with the august tribute, whose name was Komu-ha-chimu-kamu-ki-mu,  was a man deeply versed in the medical art. So he cured the Heavenly Sovereign's august sickness.

[SECT. CXXXIX.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART III. HE RECTIFIES THE PEOPLE'S NAMES).]

Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, lamenting the transgressions in the surnames and gentile names of the people of all the surnames and names in the Empire [*1b] placed jars [for trial by] hot water [*2b] at the Wondrous

[paragraph continues] Cape of Eighty Evils in Words at Amakashi,  and deigned to establish the surnames and gentile names of the eighty heads of companies.  Again the Karu Tribe  was established as the august proxy of King Karu of Ki-nashi; the Osaka Tribe  was established as the Empress's august proxy; and the Kaha Tribe  was established as the august proxy of the Empress's younger sister Ta-wi no Naka-tsu-hime.

[SECT. CXI.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART IV.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were seventy-eight. His august mausoleum is at Naga-ye near Wega in Kafuchi. [*1a]

[. CXLI.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART V.--PRINCE KARU LOVES HIS SISTER PRINCESS SO-TOHOSHI)]

After the decease of the Heavenly Sovereign, it was settled that King Karu of Ki-nashi should rule the Sun's succession. [*1b] But in the interval before his accession, he debauched his younger sister the Great Lady of Karu, and sang, saying:

"Making rice-fields on the mountain, making hidden conduits run on account of the mountain's height:--to-day indeed [my] body easily touches the younger sister whom I wooed with a hidden wooing, the spouse for whom I wept with a hidden weeping."

This is a Hind-Lifting Song.  Again he sang, saying:

"The rattle-rattle of the hail against the bamboo-grass:--After I shall have certainly slept, what though I be plotted against by people! When I shall have slept delightfully, if there is the disorder of the cut Hydropyrum latifolium, let there be disorder,--when I shall have slept a good  sleep!"

This is a Rustic Lifting Song.

[SECT. CXLII.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART VI.--WAR BETWEEN PRINCE KARU AND PRINCE ANAHO).]

Therefore all the officials  and likewise the people of the Empire turned against the Heir Apparent Karu, and towards the August Child Anaho. Then the Heir Apparent Karu, being alarmed, fled into the house of the Grandee the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe,  and made a provision of implements of war. (The arrows made at this  time  were provided with copper arrow-insides:  so those arrows are called by the name of Karu arrows.) Prince Anaho likewise made implements of war. (The arrows made by this Prince were just the arrows of the present time:  they are called Anaho arrows.) Thereupon Anaho raised an army, and beleaguered the house of the noble Oho-make Wo-mahe. Then, when he reached the gate, heavy ice-rain  was falling. So he sang, saying:

"Come thus under cover of the metal gate of the Noble Oho-mahe Wo-mahe! We will stand till the rain stops."

Then the Noble Oho-mahe came singing, lifting his hands, striking his knees, dancing, and waving his arms. The Song said:

"The courtiers are tumultuous, [saying] that the small bell of the garter of the courtiers has fallen off. Country-people, too, beware!"

This Song is of a Courtier's Style.  Singing thus, he  came near and said: "August Child of our Heavenly Sovereign! Come not with arms against the King thine elder brother. If thou shouldst come against him with arms, people will surely laugh. I  will secure him and

present him to thee."  The Prince Anaho disbanded his troops and went away. So the Noble Oho-make Wo-mahe secured Prince Karu, and led him forth, and presented him [to Prince Anaho]. The captive Prince sang, saying:

"Maiden of heaven-soaring Karu! if thou cry violently, people will know. Cry quietly like the doves on Mount Hasa."

Again he sang:

"Maiden of heaven-soaring Karu! Come and sleep, and [then] pass on, oh maiden of Karu!"

"As, if the maiden of heaven-soaring Karu cried violently, people would know, she cries quietly like the doves on Mount Hasa."

[paragraph continues] According to this reading, the poet simply explains the reason of the undemonstrativeness of his mistress's grief; according to that in the text, he implores her not to weep too passionately.--Amadamu or amadamu ya, "heaven-soaring, "is the Pillow-Word for Karu, applied to it punningly on account of its similarity in sound to the word kari, "a wild. goose," which well deserves the epithet "heaven-soaring." Of Mount Hasa nothing is known.

[SECT. CXLIII.--EMPEROR IN-GIYO (PART VII.--DEATH OF PRINCE KARU AND PRINCESS SO-TOHOSHI).]

So Prince Karu was banished to the hot waters of Iyo.  Again when about to be banished, he sang saying:

"The heaven-soaring birds, too, are indeed messengers. When thou hearest the voice of the crane, ask my name."

These three songs are of a Heaven-Soaring style.  Again he sang, saying:

"If they banish the Great Lord to an island, he will indeed make the remaining return voyage. Beware of my mat! Mat indeed in words,--beware of my spouse!

 This Song is of a Partly Lowered Rustic style.  Queen So-tohoshi presented a Song [to him]. That Song said:

"Let not thy feet tread on the oyster-shells of the shore of Ahine with its summer herbs! Pass there [after] having made clear!"

So when afterwards again, being unable to restrain her love, she went after him, she sang, saying:

"Thy going has become long past. I will go, oh! to meet thee. Wait! I can not wait." (What is here called yama-tadzu is [what is] now [known by the name of] tatsuge.)

So when in her pursuit she reached [the place where Prince Karu was, he, who had been] pensively waiting, sang, saying:

"Alas! beloved spouse, who settledst the  whereabouts of our grave, setting up flags in the great vale, setting up flags in the little vale of Hatsuse the hidden castle! Alas! beloved spouse, whom I see after [our many troubles], prostrate like a tsuki bow, standing like an adzusa bow!"

Again he sang, saying:

"Driving sacred piles in the upper reach, driving true piles in the lower reach of the river of secluded Hatsuse, and hanging on 303 the sacrificial piles a mirror, bunging on the true piles true jewels:--if they said that the younger sister whom I love like a true jewel, that the spouse whom I love like a mirror were [there], I would go home, I would long for my country."

Having thus sung, they forthwith killed themselves together.  So these two songs are Reading Songs.

[SECT. CXLIV.--EMPEROR AN-KO (PART I.--HE SLAYS KING OHO-KUSAKA).]

The august child  Anaho dwelt at the palace of Anaho at Isonokami,  and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign sent the Grandee of Ne,  ancestor of the Grandees of Sakamoto, to the residence of King Oho-kusaka, on behalf of his younger brother Prince Oho-hatsuse to command thus: "I wish Thine Augustness's younger sister

[paragraph continues] Queen Waka-kusaka to wed Prince Oho-hatsuse. So do thou present her."  Then King Oho-kusaka did obeisance four times, and said: "Owing to a supposition that there might be some such Great Commands, I have kept her always indoor.  With reverence  will I respectfully offer her according to the Great Commands." Nevertheless, thinking it disrespectful [merely] to send a message,  he forthwith, as a ceremonial gift  from his younger sister, made [the Grandee of Ne] take a pushwood jewel head-dress  to present [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. The Grandee of Ne forthwith stole the jewel headdress meant as a ceremonial gift, and slandered King Oho-kusaka, saying: "King Oho-kusaka would not receive the Imperial Commands, but said: "An soror mea fiet ejusdem stirpis [viri] inferior storea?"  and, grasping the hilt of his cross-sword,  was angry." So the Heavenly Sovereign, having in his great anger slain King Oho-kusaka, took that King's chief wife Nagata-no-oho-iratsume,  and made her Empress.

[SECT. CXLV.--EMPEROR AN-KO (PART II.--HE IS SLAIN BY KING MA-YOWA).]

After this, the Heavenly Sovereign, being on [his] divine couch,  was sleeping at midday. Then he spoke to his Empress, saying: "Is there anything on thy mind?" She replied, saying: "Being the object of the Heavenly Sovereign's generous favour, what, can there be on my mind?"  Hereupon the Empress's former child,  King Ma-yowa, who was seven years old that year, happened to be just then playing outside the apartment.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign, not Knowing that the young King was playing outside the apartment, spoke to the Empress, saying: "I have constantly something upon my mind, namely [the fear] that thy child King Ma-yowa, when he comes to man's estate, may, on learning that I slew the King his father, requite me with a foul heart."  Thereupon King Ma-yowa, who had been playing outside

the apartment, and whose ear had caught these words, forthwith watched for the Heavenly Sovereign to be augustly asleep, and, taking the great sword [that lay] by his side,  forthwith struck off the Heavenly Sovereign's head, and fled into the house of the Grandee Tsubura.  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were fifty-six, His august  is on the mound of Fushimi at Sugahara.

[SECT. CXLVI.--EMPEROR AN-KO (PART III.--PRINCE OHO HATSUSE SLAYS PRINCES KURO-BIKO AND SHIRO-BIRO).]

Then Prince Oho-hatsuse,  who at that time was a lad, was forthwith grieved and furious on hearing of this event, and went forthwith to his elder brother King Kurobiko,  and said: "They have slain  the Heavenly Sovereign. What shall be done?" But King Kurobiko was not startled, and was of unconcerned heart.  There upon King Oho-hatsuse reviled his elder brother, saying: "For one thing it being the Heavenly Sovereign, for another thing it being thy brother, how is thy heart without concern?  What! not startled, but unconcerned on hearing that they have slain thine elder brother!"--and forthwith he clutched him by the collar; dragged him out, drew his sword, and slew him. Again, going to his elder brother King Shiro-biko, he told him the circumstances as before. The unconcernedness again was like [that shown by] King Kuro-biko. [So King Oho-hatsuse,] having forthwith clutched him by the collar, pulled him along, and dug a pit on reaching Woharida,  buried him as he stood,  so that by the time he had been buried up to the loins, both his eyes burst out, and he died.

[SECT. CXLVII.--EMPEROR  (PART IV.--DEATH OF PRINCE MA-YOWA AND OF THE GRANDEE TSUBURA).]

Again he raised an army and beleaguered the house of the Grandee Tsubura. Then [the other side also] raised an army to resist the attack,  and the arrows that were shot forth were like unto the falling down of the [ears of the] reeds.  Thereupon King Oho-hatsuse, using his spear as a staff, peeped in,  and said: "Is perchance the maiden, with whom I spoke, in this house?"  Then the Grandee Tsubura, hearing these commands,  came forth himself, and having taken off the weapons with which he was girded, did obeisance eight times, and said: "The maiden Princess Kara, whom anon thou deignedst to woo, is at thy service. Again in addition I will present to thee five granaries. (What are called the five granaries are now the gardeners of the five villages of Kadzuraki: ) Meanwhile the reason why she does not come out to meet thee in person is that from of old down to the present time grandees and chiefs have been known to hide in the palaces of Kings, but Kings have not yet been known to hide in the houses of grandees.  Therefore I think that, though a vile slave of a grandees  exerting his utmost  in the fight can scarcely conquer, yet must he die rather than desert a Prince who, trusting in him, has entered into his house."  Having thus

spoken, he again took his weapons and went in again to . Then, their strength being exhausted and their arrows finished, he said to the Prince: "My  hands are wounded, and our arrows likewise are finished. We cannot now fight. What shall be done? "The Prince  replied, saying: "If that be so, there is nothing more to do. [Do thou] now slay me. "So [the Grandee Tsubura] thrust the Prince to death with his sword, and forthwith killed himself by cutting off his own head.

[SECT. CXLVIII.--EMPEROR AN-KO (PART V:--PRINCE OHO-HATSUSE SLAYS PRINCE OSHIHA).]

After this Karu-fukuro,  ancestor of the Dukes of Yama of Sasaki in Afumi,  said [to King Oho-hatsuse]: "At Kuta  [and?] on the moor of Kaya at Wata in Afumi, boars and deer are abundant. Their legs as they stand are like a moor [covered] with wogi;  the horns they point up are like withered trees." At this  [King Oho-hatsuse], taking with him King Ichi-no-be-no-oshiha, made a progress to Afumi, and on reaching this moor, each of them built a separate temporary palace to lodge in. Then next morning, before the sun had risen, King Oshiha with a tranquil heart rode along on his august horse, and, reaching and standing beside King Oho-hatsuse's temporary Palace, said to King Oho-hatsuse's attendants: "Is he not awake yet? He must  be told quickly [that I am come]. It is already day-light.  He must come to the hunting-ground,"--and forthwith urging his horse, he went forth. Then the people who served the august person of King Oho-hatsuse

said: "As [King Oshiha] is a violent-spoken  Prince, thou shouldst be on thy guard, and likewise it were well to arm thine august person." Forthwith he put on armour underneath his clothes, took and girded on him his bow and arrows, rode off on horseback, and in a sudden interval setting his horse by the side [of the other King's], took out an arrow, shot King Oshiha down, forthwith moreover cut his body [to pieces], put [them] into a horse's manger, and buried them level with the earth.

[SECT. CXLIX.--EMPEROR AN-KO (PART VI.--FLIGHT OF PRINCES OHOKE AND WOKE)].

Hereupon King Ichi-no-be's children  King Ohoke and King Woke (two Deities), having heard of this affray, fled away. So when they reached Karibawi  in Yamashiro and were eating their august provisions, an old man with a tattooed face came and seized the provisions. Then the two Kings said: "We do not grudge the provisions. But

who art thou? "He replied, saying: "I am a boar-herd in Yamashiro." So they fled across the River Kusuba,  reached the land of Harima,  entered the house of a native of that country named Shizhimu,  hid their persons, and worked as grooms and cow-herds.

[SECT. CL.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU, (I.--GENEALOGIES).]

His Augustness Oho-hatsuse-no-waka-take dwelt in the palace of Asakura at Hatsuse,  and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded Queen Wake-kusaka-be, younger sister of King Oho-kusaka (no children). Again he wedded Princess Karu, daughter of the Grandee Tsubura, and begot august children: His Augustness Shiraka; next his younger sister Her Augustness Princess Waka-tarashi (two Deities).

[SECT. CLI.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART II.--VARIOUS DEEDS).]

So the Shiraka Clan  was established as the august proxy of Prince Shiraka. Again the Hatsuse-Clan-Retainers  were established. At this time there came over people from Kure. Again the Kahase Retainers  were established. These people from Kure  were lodged  at Kure-hara. So the place was called by the name of Kure-hara.

[SECT CLII.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART III.--THE ROOF OF THE HOUSE OF THE GREAT DEPARTMENTAL LORD OF SHIKI).]

In the beginning, when the Empress  dwelt at Kusaka,  [the Heavenly Sovereign] made a progress in Kafuchi by way of the Tadagoye  road at Kusaka. Then, on climbing to the top of the mountain and gazing on the interior of the country, [he perceived that] there was a house built with a raised roof-frame.  The Heavenly Sovereign sent to ask [concerning] that house, saying: "Whose roof with a raised frame is that?" The answer was: "It is the house of the great Departmental Lord of Shiki."  Then the Heavenly Sovereign said: "What! a slave builds his own house in imitation of the august abode of the Heavenly Sovereign!" . . . . and forthwith he sent men to burn the house [down], when the Great Departmental Lord, with trembling and dread, bowed his head,  saying: "Being a slave, I like a slave did not understand, and have built overmuch. I am in great dread."  So the thing that he presented as an august offering [in token] of his entreaty was a white dog  clothed in cloth  and with a bell hung [round its neck]; and he made a kinsman of his own, named Koshihaki,  lead it by a string and present it [to the Heavenly Sovereign]. So the Heavenly Sovereign ordered them to desist from burning [the house].

[SECT. CLIII.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART IV.--HE WOOES PRINCESS WAKA-KUSAKA-BE).]

Forthwith making a progress to the residence of Queen Wakakusaka-be the Heavenly Sovereign sent the dog as a message, saying: "This thing is a strange thing which I got to day on the road. So it is a thing to woo with,"--and so saying, sent it in as a present. Thereupon Queen Waka-kusaka-be sent to say to the Heavenly Sovereign: "It is very alarming that thou shouldst make a progress with thy back to the sun.  So I will come up straight [to the capital], and respectfully

serve thee."  When therefore he returned up and dwelt in the palace, he went and stood on the ascent  of that mountain, and sang, saying:

"In the hollow between the nearer and the further mountain, this Mount Kusakabe and Mount Heguri, [is] growing the flourishing broad-leafed boar-oak; at the base grow intertwining bamboos; on the top grow luxuriant bamboos:--we sleep not [now] intertwined like the intertwining bamboos, we sleep not certainly like the luxuriant bamboos: [but] oh! my beloved  spouse, with whom [I] shall afterwards sleep intertwined!"

And he forthwith sent back a messenger with this Song.

[SECT. CLIV.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART V.--STORY OF THE WOMAN AKAWI-KO).]

Again once when the Heavenly Sovereign going out for amusement, reached the River Miwa,  there was a girl, whose aspect was very beautiful, washing clothes by the river-side. The Heavenly Sovereign asked the girl, [saying]: "Whose child art thou?" She replied, saying: "My name is Akawi-ko of the Hiketa Tribe."  Then he caused her to be told, saying: "Do not thou  marry a husband. I will send for thee, "--and [with these words] he  to the palace. So eighty years had already passed while she reverently awaited the Heavenly Sovereign's commands. Thereupon Akawi-ko thought: "As, while looking for the [Imperial] commands, I have already passed many years, and as my face and form are lean and withered, there is no longer any hope. Nevertheless, if I do not show [the Heavenly Sovereign] how truly I have waited, my disappointment will be unbearable;"--and [so saying] she caused merchandise

to be carried on tables holding an hundred,  and came forth and presented [these gifts as] tribute. Thereat the Heavenly Sovereign, who had quite forgotten what he had formerly commanded, asked Akawi-ko, saying: "What old woman art thou, and why art thou come hither?" Then Akawiko replied, saying: "Having in such and such a month of such and such a year received the Heavenly Sovereign's commands, I have been reverently awaiting the great command until this day, and eighty years have past by. Now my appearance is quite decrepit, and there is no longer any hope. Nevertheless I have come forth in order to show and declare my faithfulness." Thereupon the Heavenly Sovereign was greatly startled [and exclaimed]: "I had quite forgotten the former circumstance; and thou meanwhile, ever faithfully awaiting my commands, hast vainly let pass by the years of thy prime. This is very pitiful." In his heart he wished to marry her, but shrank from her extreme age, and could not make the marriage; but he conferred on her an august Song. That Song said:

"How awful is the sacred oak-tree, the oak-tree of the august dwelling! Maiden of the oak-plain!"

Again he sang, saying:

"The younger chestnut orchard plain of Hiketa:--o si dormivissem cum ilia in juventa! Oh! how old she has become!"

Then the tears that Akawi-ko wept quite drenched the red-dyed sleeve that she had on.  In reply to the great august Song, she sang, saying:

"Left over from the piling up of the jewel-wall piled up round the august dwelling,--to whom shall the person of the Deity's temple go?"

 Again she sang, saying:

"Oh! how enviable is she who is in her bloom like the flowering lotus,--the lotus of the inlet, of the inlet of Kusaka!"

Then the old woman was sent back plentifully endowed. So these four  are Quiet Songs.

[SECT. CLV.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART VI.--HE MAKES A PROGRESS TO YESHINU).]

When the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to the palace of Yeshinu,  there was on the bank of the Yeshinu

river a girl of beautiful appearance. So having wedded this girl, he returned to the Palace. Afterwards, when he again made a progress to Yeshinu, he halted where he had met the girl, and in that place raised a great august throne, [*2a] seated himself on that august throne, played on his august lute, and made the maiden dance. Then he composed an august Song on account of the maiden's good dancing. That Song said:

"Oh! that the maiden dancing to the lute-playing, of the august hand of the Deity seated on the throne might continue for ever!"

[SECT. CLVI.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART VII.--THE HORSE-FLY AND THE DRAGON-FLY).]

When forthwith he made a progress to the Moor of Akidzu,  and augustly hunted, the Heavenly Sovereign sat on an august throne. Then a horse-fly bit his august arm, and forthwith a dragon-fly came and ate up [*2b] the horse-fly, and flew [away]. Thereupon he composed an august Song. That Song said:

"Who is it tells in the great presence that game is lying on the peak of Womuro at Mi-yeshinu? Our Great Lord, who tranquilly carries on the government, being  seated on the throne to await the game, a horse-fly alights on and stings the fleshy part of his arm fully clad in a sleeve of white stuff, and a dragon-fly quickly eats up that horse-fly. That it might properly bear its name, the land of Yamato was called the Island of the Dragon-Fly."

So from that time that moor was called by the name  of Akidzu-nu.

[SECT. CLVII.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART VII.--ADVENTURE WITH A WILD BOAR).]

Again once the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress up to the summit of Mount Kadzuraki.  Then a large [wild] boar ran out. When the Heavenly Sovereign forthwith shot the boar with a whizzing barb,  the boar, furious, came towards him roaring.  So the Heavenly Sovereign, alarmed at the roaring, climbed up to the top of an alder. Then he sang, saying:

"The branch of the alder-tree on the opportune mound which I climbed in my flight on account of the terribleness of the roaring of the boar, of the wounded boar, which our great lord who tranquilly carries on the government had been pleased to shoot!"

[SECT. CLVIII.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART IX.--REVELATION OF THE GREAT DEITY OF KADZURAKI, LORD OF ONE WORD).]

Again once, when the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress up Mount Kadzuraki, the various officials  were all clothed in green-stained garments with red cords that had been granted to them. At that time there were people ascending the mountain on the opposite mountain acclivity quite similar to the order of the Heavenly Monarch's retinue. Again the style of the habiliments and likewise the people were similar and not distinguishable.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign gazed, and sent to ask, saying: "There being no other King in Yamato excepting myself, what person goeth thus?" The style of the reply again was like unto the commands of a Heavenly Sovereign. Hereupon the Heavenly Sovereign, being very angry, fixed his arrow [in his bow], and the various officials all fixed their arrows [in their bows]. Then those people also all fixed their arrows [in their bows]. So the Heavenly Sovereign again sent to ask, saying: "Then tell thy name. Then let each of us tell his name, and [then] let fly his arrow." Thereupon [the other] replied, saying: "As I was the first to be asked, I will be the first to tell my name. I am the Deity who dispels with a word the evil and with a word the good,--the Great Deity of Kadzuraki, Lord of One

[paragraph continues]  Word."  The Heavenly Sovereign hereupon trembled, and said: "I reverence [thee], my Great Deity. I understood not that thy great person would be revealed;" --and having thus spoken, he, beginning by his great august sword and likewise bow and arrows, took off the garments which the hundred officials had on, and worshipfully presented them [to the Great Deity].  Then the Great Deity, Lord of One Word, clapping his hands,  accepted the offering. So when the Heavenly Sovereign made his progress back, the Great Deity came down the mountain,  and respectfully escorted him to the entrance  of the Hatsuse mountain. So it was at that time the Great Deity Lord of One Word was revealed.

[SECT CLIX.--EMPEROR  (PART X.--THE MOUND OF THE METAL SPADE).]

Again when the Heavenly Sovereign made a progress to Kasuga to wed Princess Wodo, [*1a] daughter of the Grandee Satsuki of Wani, [*2a] a maiden met him by the way, and forthwith seeing the Imperial progress, ran and hid on the side of a mound. So he composed an august Song. That august Song said:

"Oh! the mound where the maiden is hiding! Oh for five hundred metal spades! then might [we] dig her out!"

So that mound was called by the name of the Mound  of the Metal Spade.

[SECT. CLX.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART XI.--THE LEAF IN THE CUP).]

Again when the Heavenly Sovereign made a copious feast under a hundred-branching tsuki-tree [*1b] at Hatsuse, a female attendant from Mihe [*2b] in the land of Ise lifted

up the great august cup, and presented it to him. Then from the hundred-branching tsuki-tree there fell a leaf and floated in the great august cup. The female attendant, not knowing that the fallen leaf was floating in the cup, did not desist from presenting  the great august liquor to the Heavenly Sovereign, who, perceiving the leaf floating in the cup, knocked the female attendant down, put his sword to her neck, and was about to cut off her head, when the female attendant spoke to the Heavenly Sovereign, saying: "Slay me not! There is something that I must say to thee:" and forthwith she sang, saying:

"The palace of Hishiro at Makimuku is a palace where shines the morning sun, a palace where glistens the evening sun, a palace plentifully rooted as the root of the bamboo, a palace with spreading roots like the roots of the trees, a palace pestled with oh! eight hundred [loads of] earth, As for the branches of the hundred-fold flourishing tsuki-tree growing by the house of new licking at the august gate [made of]  chamaecyparis [wood], the uppermost branch has the sky above it, the middle branch has the east above it, the lowest branch has the country above it. A leaf from the tip of the uppermost branch falls against the middle branch; a leaf from the tip of the middle branch falls against the lowest branch; a leaf from the tip of the lowest branch, falling into the oil floating in the fresh jewelled goblet which the maid  of Mihe is lifting up, all [goes] curdle-curdle. Ah! this is very awful, August Child of the High-Shining Sun! The tradition of the thing, too this!"

So on her presenting this Song, her crime was  pardoned. Then the Empress sang. Her Song said:

"Present the luxuriant august liquor to the august child of the high-shining sun, who is broad like the leaves, who is brilliant like the blossoms of the broad-foliaged five hundred[-fold branching] true camellia-tree that stands growing by the house of new licking in this high metropolis of Yamato, on this high-timbered mound of the metropolis The tradition of this thing, too this!"

Forthwith the Heavenly Sovereign sang, saying:

"The people of the great palace, having put on scarfs like the quail-birds having put their tails together like wagtails' and congregated together like the yard-sparrows, may perhaps to-day be truly steeped in liquor,--the people of the palace of the high-shining sun. The tradition of the thing, too, this."

These three Songs are Songs of Heavenly Words.   So at this copious feast this female attendant from Mihe was praised and plentifully endowed.

Kefu mo ka mo
      Saka-mi-dzuku-rashi.

rendered "may perhaps to day be truly steeped in liquor," Moribe would like to consider the lines

Asu ma koma
      Saka-mi-dzuku-rashi,

i.e., "may perhaps to-morrow be truly steeped in liquor" to have been accidentally omitted. There is no doubt but that their insertion would add to the effect of the poem from the point of view of style.

[SECT. CLXI.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART XII.--SONGS BY THE EMPEROR AND PRINCESS WODO).]

On the day of this copious feast the Heavenly Sovereign, when Princess Wodo of Kasuga  presented to him the great august liquor, sang again, saying:

"Oh! the grandee's daughter holding the excellent flagon! [If] thou hold the excellent flagon, hold it firmly! Hold it quite firmly, more and more firmly, child holding the excellent flagon."

This is a Cup Song.  Then Princess Wodo presented  a Song. That Song said:

"Would that I were [thou,] the lower board of the arm-rest whereon our great lord who tranquilly carries on the government stands leaning at morn, stands leaning at eve! Oh! mine elder brother!"

This is a Quiet Song.

[SECT. CLXII.--EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU (PART XIII.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were one hundred and twenty-four. His august mausoleum is at Takawashi in Tajihi  in Kafuchi,

[SECT. CLXIII.--EMPEROR SEI-NEI (PART I.--SEARCH FOR A SUCCESSOR TO HIM).]

His Augustness Shiraka-no-oho-yamato-ne-ko dwelt at the palace of Mikakuri at Ihare, [*1a] and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Sovereign had no Empress, and likewise no august children. So the Shiraka-Clan  was established as his august proxy. So after the Heavenly Sovereign's decease, there was no King to rule the Empire. Thereupon, on enquiry [being made] for a King who should rule the sun's succession, Oshinumi-no-iratsume,  another name for whom was Princess Ihi-toyo, younger sister of Prince Ichinobe-oshiha-wake,  [was found to be] residing at the palace of Tsunusashi at Takaki in Oshinumi in Kadzuraki.

[SECT. CLXIV.--EMPEROR SEI-NEI (PART II.--PRINCES OHOKE AND WOKE ARE DISCOVERED).]

Then Wodate, Chief of the Mountain Clan [*1b] when appointed governor of the land of Harima, arrived just at

[paragraph continues]  [the time of] a rejoicing for the new cave of an inhabitant called Shizhimu.  Hereupon, when the feasting and the drinking were at their height, they all danced in turn. So two young children  [employed] to light the fire sat beside the furnace.  These young children were made to dance. Then one of the young children said: "Do thou the elder brother dance first." The elder brother likewise said: "Do thou the younger brother dance first." When they thus yielded to each other, the people who were met together laughed at their manner of yielding to each other.  So at last the elder brother danced, [and when he had] finished, the younger when about to dance chanted, saying:

"On the bamboos on the mountain-slopes, behind which are hidden as soon as they appear my warrior-mate's sword, on whose hilt red earth was daubed, for whose cord red cloth was cut, and his red flags that were set up!:--Beggarly descendants of King Ichinobe-no-oshiha, august child of the Heavenly Sovereign Izaho-wake, who ruled the Empire as it were cutting the [bamboos'] roots and bending down their extremities, and like playing on an eight-stringed lute!"

 Then forthwith Chief Wodate, starting at the sound [of these words], and rolling off his couch,  drove away the people of the cave; and having set the two  princes [one] on his left knee and [the other] on  right and wept and lamented, he collected the people together, and having built a temporary palace, and set [the two princes]

to dwell in that temporary palace, he sent a courier up [to the capital]. Thereupon their aunt, Queen Ihi-toyo, delighted to hear [the news], made them come up to the palace.

[SECT. CLXV.--EMPEROR SEI-NEI (.--THE GRANDEE SHIBI). ]

So when the government of the Empire was about to be assumed,  the Grandee Shibi,  ancestor of the Grandees of Heguri  mixed in the Songs, and took the hand of the beautiful person whom His Augustness Woke was about to wed. This maiden was a daughter of one of the Headmen of Uda,  and her name was Ofuwo.  Then His Augustness Woke likewise mixed in the Song-Hedge.  Thereupon the Grandee Shibi sang, saying:

(iv) "The further fin of the roof of the great palace is bent down at the corner."

When he had thus sung, and requested the conclusion

of the Song, His Augustness Woke sang, saying:

(v) "It is on account of the great carpenter's  awkwardness that it is bent down at the corner."

Then the Grandee Shibi sang again, saying:

(viii)"The great lord, on account of the magnanimity of his heart, does not enter and stand in the eight-fold hedge of branches of the child of a grandee."

Hereupon the Prince sang again, saying:

(i) "Looking on the breakers of the briny current, I see my spouse standing by the fin of the tunny that comes sporting."

Then the Grandee Shibi, getting more and more angry sang, saying:

(ix) "[Though] the eight-fold hedge of branches of the Prince the Great Lord be made fast at eight places, be made fast all round, 'tis a hedge that shall be cut, 'tis a hedge that shall be burnt."

Then the Prince again sang, saying:

(ii) "Oh fisherman that spearest the tunny, the great fish! He being [there], thou must be sad at heart, tunny-spearing fisherman!"

Having thus sung, the feast was concluded at dawn,  and they all retired. Next morning the two Deities,  His Augustness Ohoke and His Augustness Woke, took counsel, saying: "All the people of the Court go to Court in the morning, and assemble at Shibi 's gate at noon. So  Shibi must surely now be sleeping, and,

[paragraph continues]  moreover there will be nobody at the gate. So unless it be now, it were hard to plot against him," --and forthwith they at once raised an army, and beleaguered the house of the Grandee Shibi, and slew him.

[SECT. CLXVI.--EMPEROR SEI-NEI (PART IV.--PRINCE OHOKE CEDES THE EMPIRE TO PRINCE WOKE).]

Then each of the two Princes ceded the Empire to the other, and His Augustness Ohoke [finally] ceded it to the younger brother His  Woke, saying: "Had not Thine Augustness revealed our names when we dwelt in the house of Shizhimu in Harima, we should never have arrived at being the lords of the Empire. This is quite owing to Thine Augustness's deed. So, though I be the elder brother, do Thine Augustness rule the Empire first,"--and [with these words] he urgently ceded [his claim]. So, being unable to refuse, His Augustness Woke ruled the Empire first.

[SECT. CLXVII.--EMPEROR KEN-ZO (PART I.--THE OLD WOMAN OKI-ME).]

His Augustness Woke-no-ihasu-wake dwelt at the palace of Chika-tsu-Asuka,  and ruled the Empire for

eight years. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded the Queen of Naniha,  daughter of the King of Ihaki.  He had no children. At the time when this Heavenly Sovereign was searching for the august bones of the King his father, King Ichinobe,  there came out from the land of Afumi [to the palace] a poor old woman, who said: "The place where the prince's august bones are buried is specially well known to me,  and moreover [his skeleton] can be known by his august teeth." (His august teeth were teeth uneven like a lily.) Then people were set  to dig the  ground and search for the august bones; and the bones having been forthwith obtained, an august mausoleum was made on the mountain east of the Moor of Kaya,  and they were interred, and the children of Kara-fukuro  were made to guard the august mausoleum. Afterwards the august bones were brought up [to the Capital]. So having returned up [to the Capital, the Heavenly Sovereign] sent for the old woman, praised her for having, without forgetting, kept the place in mind, and conferred upon her the name of the Old Woman Oki-me:  thus did he send for her into the palace, and deign to treat her with deep and wide kindness. So he built a house for the old woman to dwell in dose to the palace, and always sent for her every day. So he hung a bell by the door of the great hall, and always rang it when he wished to call the old woman. So he composed an august Song. That Song said:

"Oh! the far-distant bell tinkles when she has past the moor with its low eulalias and the little valley. Oh! Oki-me must be coming!"

Hereupon the old woman said: "I am very aged,

and would fain depart to my native land." So when the Heavenly Sovereign let her depart according to her request, he saw her off and sang, saying:

"Ah Okime! Okime from Afumi! from to-morrow [onwards] wilt [thou] be hidden behind the deep mountains, and alas! not seen!"

[SECT. CLXVIII.--EMPEROR KEN-ZO (PART II.--HE SLAYS THE BOAR-HERD).]

The Heavenly Sovereign searched for the old boar-herd who had seized his august provisions at the time when he first met with adversity and was fleeing;  and, having sought him out, sent for him up [to the Capital], beheaded him in the bed  of the River Asuka,  and cut the knee-tendons of all his kindred. Wherefore down to the present time his descendants, on the day when  they  come up to Yamato, always limp of their own accord. So the man's abode had been well seen and divined.  So the place was named Shimesu.

[SECT. CLXIX.--EMPEROR KEN-ZO (PART III.--THE EMPEROR YU-RIYAKU'S MAUSOLEUM IS DISFIGURED).]

The Heavenly Sovereign, deeply hating the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, who had slain the King his father, wished to be revenged on his spirit.  So when wishing to destroy the august mausoleum of the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, he [was about to] send people [to execute this design], his elder brother, His Augustness Ohoke, addressed' him, saying: "To demolish this august mausoleum thou shouldst not send other people. None but myself shall go, and I will demolish it according to the Heavenly Sovereign's august heart.  Then the Heavenly Sovereign commanded: "Make thy progress, then, according to thy decree,"  Wherefore His Augustness Ohoke, having proceeded down himself, slightly excavated the side of the august mausoleum, and returned up [to the capital], and reported that he had dug up and demolished it. Then the Heavenly Sovereign, astonished at the quickness of his return up, asked how he had demolished it. He replied, saying: "I slightly excavated the earth at the side of the august mausoleum." The Heavenly Sovereign said: "Wishing to be revenged on the enemy, of the King our father, I had counted on.

the complete demolition of the mausoleum, Why hast thou [only] slightly excavated it? "He replied, saying:  "The reason why I did so was that the wish to be revenged on the spirit of the foe of the King our father is truly just. Nevertheless the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse, though he were our father's foe, was still our uncle, and moreover was an Heavenly Sovereign who ruled the Empire. So if we now, simply from the consideration of his having been our father's enemy, were completely to demolish the mausoleum of an Heavenly Sovereign who ruled the Empire, after-generations would surely revile us. Meanwhile the wrongs of the King our father must not be unrevenged. So I slightly excavated the side of the mausoleum. This insult will quite suffice as a token to future ages." On his thus addressing him, the Heavenly Sovereign said: 'This also is very just, Be it as thou sayest."

[SECT. CLXX.--EMPEROR KEN-ZO (PART IV.--HIS AGE AND PLACE OF BURIAL).]

So the Heavenly Sovereign died, and His Augustness Ohoke ruled the succession of Heaven's sun.  The Heavenly Sovereign's august years were thirty-eight

years. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Ihatsuki at Katawoka.

[SECT. CLXXI.--EMPEROR NIN-KEN.]

His Augustness Ohoke dwelt at the palace of Hirataka at Isono-kami, and ruled the Empire. The Heavenly Sovereign wedded Kasuga-no-oho-iratsume, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Oho-hatsuse-no-waka-take, and begot august children: Takaki-no-iratsume; next Takara-no-iratsume; next Kasubi-no-iratsume; next Tashiraka-no-iratsume; next His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki; next Prince Ma-waka. The child born to him by his next wife Naka-no-waku-go-no-iratsume, daughter of the Grandee  of  Wani, was: Kasuga-no-yamada-no-iratsume. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered seven altogether. Of these His Augustness Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire.

[SECT. CLXXII--EMPEROR MU-RETSU.]

His Grandeur Wo-hatsuse-no-waka-sazaki dwelt in the palace of Namiki at Hatsuse, and ruled the Empire for eight years. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. So the Wo-hatsuse Tribe was established as

his august proxy. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Ihatsuki at Karawoka. On the death of this Heavenly Monarch there was no prince to inherit the Empire, So His Augustness Ohodo, the fifth descendant of the Heavenly Monarch Homuda, was sent for down to the land of Afumi, and married to her Augustness Tashiraka, and presented with the Empire.

[SECT. CLXXIII.--EMPEROR KEI-TAI.]

His Augustness Ohodo dwelt in the Palace of Tamaho at Ihare, and ruled the Empire. The (two) august children born to this Heavenly Monarch by Waka-hime, ancestress of the Dukes of Miwo, were: Oho-iratsuko, next Idzumo-no-iratsume. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife, Meko-no-iratsume, sister of the Chieftain Ofushi, ancestor of the Chieftains of Wohari, were: His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-taka-kana-hi; next His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife (the Great Empress) Her Augustness Tashiraka, the august daughter of the Heavenly Monarch Ohoke, was: His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife Wo-kumi-no-iratsume, daughter of Prince Okinaga-no-mate, was: Sasage-no-iratsume. The three august children born to him by his next wife Kuro-hime, daughter of Prince Sakata-no-oho-mata, were: Kamu-saki-no-iratsume; next Mamuta-no-iratsume; next Uma-tsuta-no-iratsume. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Seki-hime, daughter of Womochi Grandee of Mamuta were: Mamuta-no-oho-iratsume; next Shira-saka-no-iku-hi-no-iratsume; next Wo-nu-no-iratsume, another name for whom is Naga-me-hime. The (four) children born to him by his

next wife Yamato-hime, younger sister of Katabu Duke of Miwo, were: ; next Prince Maroko; next Prince Mimi; next Aka-hime-no-iratsume. The (three) children born to him by his next wife Abe-no-haye-hime, were: Waka-ya-no-iratsume; next Tsubura-no-iratsume; next Prince Adzu. The august children of this Heavenly Monarch numbered nineteen in all (seven Kings and twelve Queens). Of these His Augustness Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire; next His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi ruled the Empire; the next, Queen Sasage, presided at the temple of the Deity of Ise. In this august reign Ihawi, Lord of Tsukushi, was disobedient to the Imperial Decrees, and was exceedingly disrespectful. Soy the Great Chieftain Mononobe-no-arakawi and the Chieftain Ohotomo-no-kanamura were both sent to slay Ihawi.  The august years of this Heavenly Monarch were forty-three. His august mausoleum is at Awi in Mishima.

[SECT. CXXXIV.--EMPEROR KAN-AN.]

His Augustness Hiro-kuni-oshi-take-kana-hi dwelt in the Palace of Kanahashi at Magari, and ruled the Empire. This Heavenly Monarch had no august children. His august grave is at the village of Takaya in Furuchi in Kafuchi.

[SECT. CLXXV.--EMPEROR SEN-KUWA.]

His Augustness Take-wo-hiro-kuni-oshi-tate dwelt in the Palace of Ihorinu at Hinokuma, and ruled the Empire.

[paragraph continues] The august children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife Her Augustness Tachi-bana-no-naka-tsu-hime, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Ohoke, were: Her Augustness Ishi-hime; next Her Augustness Wo-ishi-hime; next King Kura-no-waka-ye. The august children born to him by his next wife, Kafuchi-no-waku-go-hime, were: King Honoho; next King Weha. The august children of this Heavenly  Sovereign numbered altogether five (three Kings and two Queens). So King Honoho (was the ancestor of the Dukes Shihida.) Prince Weha (was the ancestor of the Dukes of Wina and of the Dukes of Tajihi.)

[SECT. CLXXVI.--EMPEROR KIM-MEI.]

The Heavenly Sovereign Ame-kuni-oshi-haruki-hiro-niha dwelt in the Great Palace of Shikishima, and ruled the Empire. The (three) august children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife, Her Augustness Ishi-hime, the august daughter of the Heavenly Sovereign Hi-no-kuma, were: King Yata; next His Augustness Nu-na-kura-tama-shiki; next King Kasanuhi. The (one) august child born to him by his next wife Her Augustness Wo-ishi-hime, younger sister [of the first one], was: King Kami. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Nukako-no-iratsume, daughter of the Grandee Hitsuma of Kasuga, were: Kasuga-no-yamada-no-iratsume; next King Maroko; next King Soga-no-kura. The (thirteen) children born to him by his next wife Kitashi-hime, daughter of the Prime Minister the Noble Inawe of Soga were: His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi; next his younger sister Queen Ihakumo; next King Atori; next

[paragraph continues] Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime; next King Mata-maroko; next King Oho-yake; next King Imigako; next King [of?] Yamashiro; next his younger sister Queen Oho-tomo; next King Sakurawi-no-yumi-hari; next King Manu; next King Tachibana-moto-no-waku-go; next King Tone. The five august children born to him by his next wife Wo-ye-hime, aunt of Her Augustness Kitashi-hime, were: King Umaki; next King Kadzuraki; next King Hashi-bito-no-ana-ho-be; next King Saki-kusa-be-no-ana-ho-be, another name for whom was Sume-irodo; next His Augustness Hatsuse-be-no-waka-sazaki. Altogether the august children of this Heavenly Sovereign numbered twenty-five Kings and Queens. Of these His Augustness Nu-na-kura-futo-tama-shiki [was he who afterwards] ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi ruled the Empire. Next Her Augustness Toyo-mike-hashiki-ya-hime ruled the Empire. Next His Augustness Hatsusebe-no-waka-sazaki ruled the Empire. In all there were four Kings and Queens that ruled the Empire.

[SECT. CLXXVII.--EMPEROR BI-DATSU.]

His Augustness Nuna-kura-futo-tama-shiki dwelt in the Palace of Wosada, and ruled the Empire for fourteen years. The (eight) children born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife, his half-sister Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime, were: King Shidzu-kahi, another name for whom was Kahi-dako; next King Takeda, another name for whom was King Wo-kahi; next King Woharita; next King Umori; next King Wohari; next

[paragraph continues] King Tame; next King Sakurawi-no-yumi-hari. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife Wo-kuma ko-no-iratsume, daughter of the Headman Ohoka of Ise, were: Her Augustness Futo-hime; next Queen Takara, another name for whom was Queen Nukade-hime. The (three) august children born to him by his next wife Her Augustness Hiro-hime, daughter of King Okinaga-no-made, were: King Osako-no-hiko-hito, another name for whom was King Maroko; next King Saka-nobori; next King Uji. The (four) august children born to him by his next wife Omina-ko-no-iratsume, daughter of Kasuga-no-naka-tsu-waku-go, were: King Naniha; next King Kuhada; next King Kasuga; next King Oho-mata. Of the august children of this Heavenly Monarch,--seventeen Kings and Queens altogether,--King Hiko-hito begot by his wife his half-sister Queen Tamura, another name for whom was Her Augustness Nukade-hime, (three) august children, namely: the Heavenly Sovereign that ruled the Empire from the Palace of Wokamoto; next King Nakatsu; next King Tara. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife, Queen Ohomata, younger sister of King Aya, were: King Chinu; next his younger sister Queen Kuhada. The (two) august children born to him by his next wife his half-sister Princess Yumi-hari, were: King Yamashiro; next Queen Kasanuhi,--altogether seven Kings and Queens, The august mausoleum [of the Heavenly Sovereign Nuna-kura-futo-tama-shiki] is at Shinaga in Kafuchi.

[SECT. CLXXVIII.--EMPEROR YOMEI.]

His Augustness Tachibana-no-toyo-hi dwelt in the Palace of Ikenobe, and ruled the Empire for three years. The one august child born to this Heavenly Sovereign by his wife Oho-gitashi-hime, daughter of the Prime Minister the noble name, was: King Tame. The (four)  august children born to him by his next wife, his half-sister Princess Hashi-bito-no-anaho-be, were: His Augustness Uhe-no-miya-no-uma-ya-dono-toyo-to-mimi; next King Kume; next King We-kuri; next King Mamuta. The august children born to him by his next wife Ihime-no-ko, daughter of Tagima-no-kura-bito-hiro, were: King Tagima; next his younger sister Sugashiroko-no-iratsume. The august mausoleum of this Heavenly Sovereign, which had been by the borders of Lake Ihare, was afterwards removed to the middle sepulchre of Shinaga.

[SECT. CLXXIX.--EMPEROR SU-JUN.]

The Heavenly Sovereign Hatsuse-be-no-waka-sazaki dwelt at the Palace of Shibabaki at Kurahashi, and ruled the Empire for four years. His august mausoleum is on the mound of Kurahashi.

[SECT. CLXXX.--EMPRESS SUI-KO.]

Her Augustness Toyo-mike-kashiki-ya-hime dwelt at the Palace of Wohorida, and ruled the Empire for thirty seven years. Her august mausoleum, which had been on the mound of Ohonu, was afterwards removed to the great sepulchre at Shinaga.

[p. A1]

APPENDIX I.

JAPANESE TEXT OF THE SONGS PRESERVED IN THE "KO-JI-KI," OR "RECORDS OF ANCIENT MATTERS," TRANSLITERATED INTO ROMAN.

I. (SECT. XIX, NOTE 6.)

          Ya-kumo   tatsu

       Idzumo   ya-he-gaki

      Tsuma-gomi   ni

       Ya-he-gaki-tsukuru

      Sono ya-he-gaki wo

   II. (SECT. XXIV, NOTE 4.)

          Ya-chi-hoko   no

       Kami   no mikoto ha

      Ya-shima-kuni

       Tsuma   magi-kanete

      Toho-tohoshi

       Koshi   no kuni ni

      Sakashi-me   wo

       Ari   to kikoshite

      Kuhashi-me   wo

       Ari   to kikoshite

      Sa-yobahi   ni

       Ari-tatashi

      Yobahi,   ni

       Ari-kayohase

      Tachi   ga wo mo

       Imada   tokazute [p. A2]

      Osuhi   wo mo

       Imada   tokaneba

      Wotome   no

       Nasu   ya ita-to wo

      Osoburahi

       Wa   ga tatasereba

      Hikodzurahi

       Wa   ga tatasereba

         Awo-yama ni

       Nuye   ha naki

      Sa-nu   tsu tori

       Kigishi   ha toyomu

      Niha   tsu tori

       Kake   ha naku

      Uretaku   mo

       Naku-naru   tori ka

      Kono   tori mo

       Uchi-yame-kosene

      Ishitafu   ya

       Ama-hase-dzukahi

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

   III. (SECT. XXIV, NOTE 5.)

          Ya-chi-hoko   no

       Kami   no mikoto

      Nuye-kusa   no

       Me   ni shi areba

      Wa   ga kokoro

       Ura-su   no tori zo

      Ima   koso ha

       Chi-dori   ni arame

      Nochi   ha

       Na-dori   ni aramu wo

      Inochi   ha

       Na   shise-tamahi so

      Ishi-tafu   ya

       Ama-hase-dzukahi

      Koto   no

       Katori-gotomo

      Ko wo ba

   IV. (SECT. XXIV, NOTE 7.)

          Awo-yama   ni

       Hi   ga kakuraba

      Nuba-tama   no

       Yo   ha ide-namu

      Asa-hi   no

       Wemi-sakaye-kite

      Taku-dzumu   no

       Shiroki   tadamuki

      Awa-yuki   no

       Wakayaru   mune wo

      So-dataki

       Tataki-managari

      Ma-tama-de

       Tama-de   sahi-maki [p. A3]

      Momo-naga   ni

       I   ha nasamu wo

      Aya   ni

       Na   kohi-kikoshi

      Ya-chi-hoko   no

       Kami   no mikoto

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

   V. (SECT. XXV, NOTE 2.)

          Nuba-tama   no

       Kuroki   mi keshi wo

      Ma-tsubusa   ni

       Tori-yosohi

      Oki   tsu tori

       Muna   miru toki

      Ha-tatagi   mo

       Kore   ha fusahazu

      He   tsu nami

       So   ni nugi-ute

      So-ni-dori   no

       Awoki   mi keshi wo

      Ma-tsubusa   ni

       Tori-yosohi

      Oki   tsu tori

       Muna   miru toki

      Ha-tatagi   mo

       Ko   mo fusahazu

      He   tsu nami

       So   ni nugi-ute

      Yama-gata   ni

       Magishi   atane tsuki

      Some-ki   ga shiru ni

       Shime-koromo   wo

      Ma-tsubusa   ni

       Tori-yosohi

      Oki   tsu tori

       Muna   miru toki

      Ha-tatagi   mo

       Ko   shi yoroshi

      Itokoya   no

       Imo   no mikoto

      Mura-tori   no

       Wa   ga mure-i-naba

      Hike-tori   no

       Wa   ga hike-i-naba

      Nakazhi   to ha

       Na   ha ifu to mo

      Yamato   no

       Hito-moto   susuki

      Unakabushi

       Na   ga nakasamaku

      Asa-ame   no

       Sa-giri   ni tatamu zo  [p. A4]

      Waka-kusa   no

       Tsuma   no mikoto.

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

   VI. (SECT. XXV, NOTE 3.)

          Ya-chi-hoko   no

       Kami   no mikoto ya

      A   ga oho-kuni

       Nushi   koso ha

      Wo   ni i-maseba

       Uchi-miru

      Shima no saki-zaki

      Kaki-miru

       Iso   no saki ochizu

      Waka-kusa   no

       Tsuma   motase-rame

      A   ha mo yo

       Me   ni shi areba

         Na wokite

       Wo   ha nashi

      Na   wokite

       Tsuma   ha nashi

      Aya-kaki   no

       Fuhayaga   shita ni

      Mushi-busuma

       Nikoya   ga shita ni

      Taku-busuma

       Sayagu   ga shita ni

      Awa-yuki   no

       Wakayaru   mune wo

      Taku-dzunu   no

       Shiroki   tadamuki

      So-dataki

       Tataki-managari

      Ma-tama-de

       Tama-de   sashi-maki

      Momo-naga   ni

       I   wo shi nase

      Toyo   mi ki

       Tate-matsurase

   VII. (SECT. XXXI, NOTE 33.)

          Ame   naru ya

       Oto-tanabata   no

      Unagaseru

       Tama   no mi sumaru

      Mi   sumaru ni

       Ana-dama   haya

      Mi tani futa watarasu

      Ajishiki

       Taka-hiko-ne   no

      Kami zo ya

[p. A5]

VIII. (SECT. XLII, NOTE 18.)

          Aka-dama   ha

       Wo   sahe hikaredo

      Shira-tama   no

       Kimi   ga yosohi shi

      Tafutoku ari-keri

   IX. (SECT. XLII, NOTE 19.)

          Oki   tsu tori

       Kamo-doku   shima ni

      Waga   wi-neshi

       Imo   ha wasurezhi

      Yo no koto-goto ni

   X. (SECT. XLVII, NOTES 16 AND 17.)

          Uda   no taka-ki ni

       Shigi-wana   haru

      Wa   ga matsu ya

       Shigi   ha sayarazu

      Isukuhashi

       Kujira   sayaru

      Konami   ga

       Na   kohasaba

      Tachi-soba   no

       Mi   no nakeku wo

      Kokishi   hiwene

       Uhanari   ga

      Na   kohasaba

       Ich-saka-ki   mi no

      Ohokeku   wo

       Kokida   hiwene

      Ye ye

       Shi   ya ko shi ya

      [Wo   ha igonofu zo]

       Aa   shi yo ko shi ya

XI. (SECT. XLVIII, NOTE 4.)

          Osaka   no

       Oho-muro-ya   ni

      Hito   saha ni

       Ki-iri-wori

      Hito   saha ni

       Iri-wori   to mo

      Mitsu-mitsushi

       Kume   no ko ga

      Kubu-tsutsu-i

       Ishi-tsutsu-i   mochi

      Uchite shi yamamu [p. A6]

      Mitsu-mitsushi

       Kume   no ko-ra ga

      Kubu-tsutsu-i

       Ishi-tsutsu-i   mochi

      Ina utaba yorashi

   XII. (SECT. XLIX, NOTE 2.)

          Mitsu   mitsushi

       Kume   no ko-ra ga

      Aha-fu   ni ha

       Ka-mira   hito-moto

      So   ne ga moto

       So   ne me tsunagite

      Uchite shi yamamu

   XIII. (SECT. XLIX, NOTE 3.)

          Mitsu-mitsushi

       Kume   no ko-ra ga

      Kaki-moto   ni

       Uweshi   hazhikami

      Kuchi   hibiku

       Ware   ha wasurezhi

      Uchite shi yamanu

   XIV. (SECT. XLIX, NOTE 4.)

          Kamu-kaze   no

       Ise   no umi no

         Ohishi

       Hahi-motohorofu

      Shitadami   no

       I-hahi-motohori

      Uchite shi yamamu

   XV. (SECT. XLIX, NOTE 6.)

          Tata   namete

       Inasa   no yama no

      Ko   no ma yo mo

       I-yuki-mamorahi

      Tatakaheba

       Ware   ba ya wenu.

      Shima   tsu tori

       U-kahi   ga tomo

      Ima suke ni kone

   XVI. (SECT. LI, NOTE 17.)

          Yamato   no

       Takasazhi-nu   wo

      Nana-yuku

       Wotome-domo

      Tare wo shi makamu

   [p. A7]

XVII. (SECT. LI, NOTE 19. )

          Katsu-gatsu   mo

       Iya-saki-dateru

      Ye wo shi makamu

   XVIII. (SECT. LI, NOTE 21.)

          A   me tsu tsu

       Chi   dori mashi to to [?]

      Nado sakeru to-me

   XIX. (SECT. LI, NOTE 22.)

          Wotome   ni

       Taka   ni ahamu to

      Wa ga sakeru to-me

   XX. (SECT. LI, NOTE 28.)

          Ashi-hara   no

       Shigekoki   wo-ya ni

      Suga-tatami

       Iyasaya   shikite

      Wa ga futari neshi

   XXI. (SECT. LII, NOTE  fukanu to   su

   XXII. (SECT. LII, NOTE .)

          Unebi-yama

       Hiru   ha kumo to wi

      Yufu   sareba

       Kaze   fukamu to zo

      Ko no ha sayageru

   XXIII. (SECT. LXVI, NOTE. 7)

          Ko   ha ya

       Mima-ki-iri-biko   ha ya

      Mima-ki-iri-biko   ha ya

       Ono   ga wo wo

      Nusumi   shi semu to

       Shiri   tsu to yo

      I-yuki-tagahi

       Mahe   tsu to yo

      I-yuki-tagahi

       Ukagahaku

      Shirani   to

       Mima-ki-iri-biko   ha ya

   [p. A8]

XXIV. (SECT. LXXXI, NOTE 4.)

          Yatsumesasu

       Idzumo-takeru   ga

      Hakeru   tachi

       Tsudzura   saha maki

      Sa-mi nashi ni ahare

   XXV. (SECT. LXXXIV, NOTE 8.)

          Sanesashi

       Sogamu   no wo-nu ni

      Moyuru   hi no

       Ho-naka   ni tachite

      Tohishi kimi ha mo

   XXVI. (SECT. LXXXVI, NOTES 3 AND 5.)

          Nihibari

       Tsukuha   wo sugite

      Iku yo ka netsuru--

      Ka-ga   nabete

       Yo   ni ha kokono-yo

      Hi ni ha towo-ka wo

   XXVII. (SECT. LXXXVII, NOTE 3.)

          Hisa-kata   no

       Ame   no Kagu-yama

      To-kama   ni

       Sa-wataru   kuhi

      Hiha-boso

       Tawaya-gahina   wo

      Makamu   to ha

       Are   ha suredo

      Se-nemu   to ha

       Are   ha omohedo

      Na   ga keseru

       Osuhi   no suso ni

      Tsuki tatanamu yo

   XXVIII. (SECT. LXXXVII, NOTE 4.)

          Taka-hikaru

       Hi   no mi ko

      Yasumishishi

       Wa   ga oho-kimi

      Aratama   no

       Toshi   ga ki-fureba

      Aratama   no

       Tsuki   ha kihe-yuku

      Ubena-ubena

       Kimi   machi-ga#a ni

      Wa   ga keseru

       Osuhi   no suso ni

      Tsuki tatanamu yo

   [p. A9]

XXIX. (SECT. LXXXIX, NOTE 6.)

          Wohari   ni

       Tada   ni mukaheru

      Wotsu   no saki naru

       Hito-tsu   matsu a se wo

      Hito-tsu   matsu

       Hito   ni ariseba

      Tachi hake-mashi wo winu kise-mashi wo

      Hito-tsu matsu a se wo

   XXX. (SECT. LXXXIX, NOTE 11.)

          Yamato   ha

       Kuni   no mahoroba

      Tatanatsuku

       Awo-kaki   yama-gomoreru

      Yamato shi uruhashi

XXXI. (SECT. LXXXIX, NOTE 11.)

          Inochi   no

       Mata-kemu   hito ha

      Tatami-komo

       Heguri   no yama no

      Kuma-kashi   ga ha wo

       Uzu   ni sase

      Sono ko

   XXXII. (SECT. LXXXIX, NOTE 11.)

          Hashikeyashi

       Wagihe   no kata yo

      Kumo-wi tachi-ku mo

   XXXIII. (SECT. LXXXIX, NOTE 15.)

          Wotome   no

       Toko   no be ni

      Wa   ga okishi

       Tsurugi   no tachi

      Sono tachi ha ya

   XXXIV. (SECT. XC, NOTE 3.)

          Nadzuki   no

       Ta   no ina-gara ni

      Ina-gara   ni

       Hahi-motorofu

      Tokoro-dzura

      .    .    .    .   .

[p. A10]

XXXV. (SECT. XC, NOTE 5.)

          Asa-zhinu-hara

       Koshi   nadzumu

      Sora   ha yukazu

       Ashi   yo yuku na

   XXXVI. (SECT. XC, NOTE 7.)

          Umi-ga   yukeba

       Koshi   nadzumu

      Oho-kahara   no

       Uwe-gusa

      Umi-ga   ha

       Isayofu

   XXXVII. (SECT. XC, NOTE 8.)

          Hama   tsu chi-dori

       Hama   yo ha yukazu

      Iso-dzutafu

   XXXVIII. (SECT. C, NOTE 18.)

          Isa   agi

       Furu-kuma   ga

      Itate   ohazuha

       Niho-dori   no

      Afumi   no umi ni

       Kadzuki   sena wa

   XXXIX. (SECT. CII, NOTE 2.)

          Kono   mi ki ha

       Wa   ga mi ki narazu

         Kushi no kami

       Toko-yo   ni i-masu

      Iha   tatasu

       Sukuna   mi kami no

      Kamu-hogi

       Hogi-kuruhoshi

      Toyo-hogi

       Hogi-motohoshi

      Matsuri-koshi

       Mi   ki zo

      Asazu wose sa sa

[p. A11]

XL. (SECT. CII, NOTE 3.)

          Kono   mi ki wo

       Kami-kemu   hito ha

      Sono   tsudzumi

       Usu   ni tatete

      Utahi-tsutsu

       Kami-kere   ka mo

      Mahi-tsutsu

       Kami-kere   ka mo

      Kono   miki no

       Mi   ki no aya ni

      Uta-danushi [ki] sa sa

   XLI. (SECT. CVI, NOTE 2.)

          Chiba   no

       Kadzu-nu   wo mireba

      Momo-chi-daru

       Ya-niha   mo miyu

      Kuni no ho mo miyu

   XLII. (SECT. C VI, NOTE 8.)

          Kono   kani ya

       Idzuku   no kani

      Momo-dzutafu

       Tsunuga   no kani

      Yoko-sarafu

       Idzuku   ni itaru

      Ichiji-shima

       Mi-shima   ni to ki

      Niho-dori   no

       Nadzuki   iki-dzuki

      Shina-dayufu

       Sasa-nami-ji   wo

      Suku-suku   to

       Wa   ga i-maseba ya

      Kohata   no michi ni

       Ahashishi   wotome

      Ushiro-de   ha

       Wo-date   ro ka mo

      Ha-nami   ha

       Shihi   (shi) nasu

      Ichihiwi   no

       Wanisa   no ni wo

      Hatsu-ni   ha

       Hada   akarakemi 353

      Shiha-ni   ha

       Ni-guroki   yuwe

      Mi-tsu-guri   no

       Sono   naka tsu ni wo [p. A12]

      Kabu-tsuku

       Ma-hi   ni ha atezu

      Mayo-gaki

       Ko   ni kaki-tare

      Ahashishi womina

      Ka   mo ga to

       Wa   ga mishi ko-ra

      Kaku   mo ga to

       A   ga mishi ko ni

      Utadakeni

       Mukahi-woru   ka mo

      Iso-hi-woru ka mo

XLIII. (SECT. CVII, NOTE 9.)

          Iza   ko-domo

       Nu-biru   tsumi ni

      Hiru   tsumi ni

       Wa   ga yuku michi no

      Kaguhashi

       Hana-tachibana   wo

      Ho   tsu ye ha

       Tori   wi-garashi

      Shi   dzu ye ha

       Hito   tori-garashi

      Mi-tsu-guri   no

       Naka   tsu ye no

      Hotsumori

       Akara-wotome   wo

      Izasasaba

       Yorashi   na

   XLIV. (SECT. CVII, NOTE 9.)

          Iza   ko-domo

       Nu-biru    ni

      Hiru   tsumi ni

       Wa   ga yuku michi no

      Kaguhashi

       Hana-tachibana   wo

      Ho   tsu ye ha

       Tori   wi-garashi

      Shi   dzu ye ha

       Hito   tori-garashi

      Mi-tsu-guri   no

       Naka   tsu ye no

      Hotsumori

       Akara-wotome   wo

      Izasasaba

       Yorashi   na

   XLIV. (SECT. CVII, NOTE 10.)

           tamaru

       Yasami   no ike no

      Wi-guhi   uchi

       [Hishi]   ga-[ra no]  [p. A13]

      Sashi-keru   shirani

       Nunaha-kuri

      Hahe-keku   shirani

       Wa   ga kokoro shi

      Iya   woko ni shite

       Ima   zo kuyashiki

   XLV. (SECT. CVII, NOTE 11.)

          Michi   no shiri

       Kohada-wotome   wo

      Kami   no goto

       Kikoyeshikadomo

      Ahi-makuramaku

   XLVI. (SECT. CVII, NOTE I2.)

          Michi   no shiri

       Kohada-wotome   ha

      Arasohazu

       Ne-shiku   wo shi zo mo.

      Uruhashimi-omofu

   XLVII. (SECT. CVIII, NOTE 2.)

          Homuda   no

       Hi   no mi ko

      Oho-sazaki

       Oho-sazaki

      Hakaseru   tachi

       Moto-tsurugi

      Suwe   fuyu

       Fuyu-ki   no su

      Kara   ga shita-ki no

       Saya-saya

   XLVIII. (SECT. CVIII, NOTE 6.)

          Kashinofu   ni

       Yokusu   wo tsukuri

      Yokusu   ni

       Kamishi   oho-mi-ki

      Umara   ni

       Kikoshi-mochi-wose

      Maro ga chi

   XLIX. (SECT. CXI, NOTE 5.)

          Susukori   ga

       Kamishi   mi ki ni

      Ware wehi ni keri

      Koto   nagu shi

       We-gushi   ni

      Ware wehi ni keri

[p. A14]

L. (SECT. CXII, NOTE 10.)

          Chihayaburu

       Uji   no watari no

      Sawo-tori   ni

       Haya-kemu   hito shi

      (Wa ga moko ni komu.)

   LI. (SECT. CXII, NOTE 15.)

          Chihaya-bito

       Uji   no watari ni

      Watari-ze   ni tateru

       Adzusa-yumi   ma-yumi

      I-kiramu   to

       Kokoro   ha mohedo

      1-toramu   to

       Kokoro   ha mohedo

      Moto-he   ha

       Kimi   wo omohi-de

      Suhe-he   ha

       Imo   wo omohi-de

      Iranakeku

       Soko   ni omohi-de

      Kanashikeku

       Koko   ni omohi-de

         I kirazu zo kuru

       Adzusa-yumi   ma-yumi

LII. (SECT. CXXII, NOTE 4.)

          Oki-he   ni ha

       Wo-bune   tsuraraku

      Kuro-zaki  no

       Masazu-ko   wagimo

      Kuni he kudarasu

LIII. (SECT. CXXII, NOTE 8.)

          Oshi-teru   ya

       Naniha   no sakiyo

      Ide-tachite

       Wa   ga kuni mireba [p. A15]

      Aha-shima

       Onogoro-shima

      Ajimasa   no

       Shima   mo miyu

      Saketsu-shima miyu

   LIV. (SECT. CXXII, NOTE I0.)

          Yama-gata   ni

       Makoru   awo-na mo

      Kibi-hito   to

       Tomo   ni shi tsumeba

      Tanushiku mo aru ka

   LV. (SECT. CXXII, NOTE 13)

          Yamato-he   ni

       Nishi   fukiagete

      Kumo-banare

       Soki-wori   to mo

      Ware wasureme ya

   LVI. (SECT. CXXII, NOTE 14.)

          Yamato-he   ni

       Yuku   ha ta ga tsuma

      Komoridzu   no

       Shita   yo hahe-tsutsu

      Yuku ha ta ga tsuma

   LVII. (SECT. CXXIII, NOTE II.)

          Tsuginefu   ya

       Yamashiro-gaha   wo

      Kaha-nobori

       Wa   ga noboreba

      Kaha   no he ni

       Ohi-dateru

      Sashibu   wo

       Sashibu   no ki

      Shi   ga shita ni

       Ohi-dateru

      Ha-biro yutsu matsuba-ki

      Shi   ga hana no

       Teri-i-mashi

      Shi   ga ha no

       Hirori-i-masuha

      Oho-kimi ro ka mo

[p. A16]

LVIII. (SECT. CXXIII, NOTE 14.)

          Tsuginefu   ya

       Yamashiro-gaha   wo

      Miya-nobori

       Wa   ga noboreba

      Awoniyoshi

       Nara   wo sugi

      Wo-date

       Yamato   wo sugi

      Wa ga migahoshi kuni ha

      Kadzuraki   Takamiya

       Wagihe   no atari

LIX. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE 3.)

          Yamashiro   ni

       I-shike   Toriyama

      Ishike   i-shike

       A   ga hashi-dzuma ni

      I-shiki-ahamu ka mo

   LX. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE 5.)

          Mimoro   no

       Sono   Takaki naru

         Ohowiko ga hara

       Ohowiko   ga hara ni aru

      Kimo-mukafu

       Kokoro   wo dani ka

      Ahi-omohazu aramu

LXI. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE 6 )

          Tsuginefu

       Yamashiro-me   no

      Ko-kuha   mochi

       Uchishi   oho-ne

      Ne-zhiro   no

       Shiro-tadamuki

      Makazukeba   koso

       Shirazu   to mo ihame

   LXXII. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE I2.)

          Yamashiro   no

       Tsutsuki   no mi-ya ni

      Mono   mawosu

       A   ga se no kimi ha

      Namita-gumashi mo

   [p. A17]

LXIII. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE 18.)

          Tsuginefu

       Yamashiro-me   no

      Ko-kuha   mochi

       Uchishi   oho-ne

      Sawa-sawa   ni

       Na   ga ihese koso

      Uchi-watasu

       Yagahaye-nasu

      Ki-iri-mawi-kure

   LXIII. (SECT. CXXIV, NOTE 18.)

          Tsuginefu

       Yamashiro-me   no

      Ko-kuha   mochi

       Uchishi   oho-ne

      Sawa-sawa   ni

       Na   ga ihese koso

      Uchi-watasu

       Yagahaye   nasu

      Ki-iri-mawi-kure

   LXIV. (SECT. CXXV, NOTE 1.)

          Yata   no

       Hito-moto   suge ha

      Ko   motazu

       Tachi   ka are-namu

      Atara-suga-hara

       Koto   wo koso

      Suge-hara   to ihame

       Atara-sugashi-me

   LXV. (SECT. CXXV, NOTE 2.)

          Yata   no

       Hito-moto   suge ha

      Hitori   wori to mo

       Oho-kimi   shi

      Yoshi   to kikosaba

       Hitori   wori to mo

   LXVI. (SECT. CXXVI, NOTE 2.)

          Medori   no

       Wa   ga oho-kimi no

      Orosu   hara

       Taga   dane ro ha mo

   LXVII. (SECT. CXXVI NOTE 3.)

          Taka-yuku   ya

       Haya-busa-wake   no

      Mi osuhi-gane

   [p. A18]

LXVIII. (SECT. CXXVI, NOTE 5.)

          Hibari   ha

       Ame   ni kakeru

      Taka-yuku   ya

       Haya-busa-wake

      Sazaki torasane

   LXIX. (SECT. CXXVI, NOTE 8.)

          Hashi-tate   no

       Kura   hashi-yama wo

      Sagashimi   to

       Iha   kaki-kanete

      Wa ga to torasu mo

   LXX. (SECT. CXXVI, NOTE 8.)

          Hashi-tate   no

       Kura-hashi-yama   ha

      Sagashikedo

       Imo   to noboreba

      Sagashiku mo arazu

   LXXI. (SECT. CXXVIII, NOTE 3.)

          Tamakiharu

       Uchi   no aso

      Na   koso ha

       Yo   no naga-hito

      Sora   mitsu

       Yamato   no kuni ni

      Kari   ko 'mu to

       Kiku   ya

   LXXII. (SECT. CXXVIII, NOTE 4.)

          Taka-hikaru

       Hi   no mi ko

      Ube   shi koso

       Tohi-tamahe

      Ma   koso ni

       Tohi-tamahe

      Are   koso ha

       Yo   no naga-hito

      Sora-mitsu

       Yamato   no kuni ni

      Kari   ko 'mu to

       Imada   kikazu

   LXXIII. (SECT. CXXVIII, NOTE 6.)

          Na   ga mi ko ya

       Tsuhi   ni shiramu to

      Kari ha ko 'murashi

   [p. A19]

LXXIV. (SECT. CXXIX, NOTE 8.)

          Karanu   wo

       Shiho   hi yaki

      Shi   ga amari

       Koto   ni tsukuri

      Kaki-hiku   ya

       Yura   no to no

      To-naka   no

       Ikuri   ni

      Fure-tatsu

       Nadzu   no ki no

      Saya-saya

   LXXV. (SECT. CXXXII, NOTE 5.)

          Tajihi-nu   ni

       Nemu   to shiriseba

      Tatsu-gomo   mo

       Mochite

      Ko-mashi   mono

       Nemu   to shiriseba

   LXXVI. (SECT. CXXXII, NOTE 7.)

          Hanifu-zaka

       Wa   ga tachi-mireba

      Kagirohi   no

       Moyuru   ihe-mura

      Tsuma ga the no asari

   LXXVII. (SECT. CXXXIII, NOTE 10.)

          Oho-saka   ni

       Afu   ya wotome wo

      Michi   toheba

       Tada   ni ha norazu

      Tajima-chi wo noru

   LXXVIII. (SECT. CXLI, NOTE 2.)

          Ashiki   no

       Yama-da   wo tsukuri

      Yama-dakami

       Shita-bi   wo washise

      Shita-dohi   ni

       Wa   ga tofu imo wo

      Shita-naki   ni

       Wa   ga naku tsuma wo

      Kofu   koso ha

       Yasuku   hada fure

   LXXIX. (SECT. CXLI, NOTE 4.)

          Sasa-ba   ni

       Utsu   ya arare no

      Tashi-dashi   ni

       Wi-netemu   nochi ha

      Hito hakayu to mo [p. A20]

      Uruhashi   to

       Sa-ne   shi sa-neteba

      Kari-komo   no

       Midareba   midare

      Sa-ne shi sa-neteba

    LXXX. (SECT. CXLII, NOTE 7.)

          Oho-mahe

       Wo-mahe   sukune ga

      Kana-to   kage

       Kaku   yori-kone

      Ame tachi-yamemu

   LXXXI. (SECT. CXLII, NOTE 8.)

          Miya-hito   no

       Ayuhi   no ko-suzu

      Ochi   ni ki to

       Miya-hito   toyomu

      Sato-bito mo yume

   LXXXII. (SECT. CXLII, NOTE 12.)

          Ama-damu

       Karu   no wotome

      Ita   nakaba

       Hito   shirinu-beshi

      Hasa no yama no hoto no

      Shita-naki ni naku

LXXXIII. (SECT., CXLII, NOTE 13.)

          Ama-damu

       Karu-wotome

      Shita-ta   ni mo

       Yori-nete   tohore

      Karu-wotome-domo

   LXXXIV. (SECT. CXLIII, NOTE 2.)

          Ama   tobu

       Tori   mo tsukahi zu

      Tadzu   ga ne no

       Kikoyemu   toki ha

      Wa ga na tohasane

   [p. A21]

LXXXV. (SECT. CXLIII, NOTE 4.)

          Oho-kimi   wo

       Shima   ni haburaba

      Funa-amari

       I-gaheri-komu   zo

      Wa   ga tatami yume

       Koto   wo koso

      Tatami   to ihame

       Wa   ga tsuma ha yume

   LXXXVI. (SECT. CXLIII, NOTE 6.)

          Natsu-kusa   no

       Ahine   no hama no

      Kaki-gahi   ni

       Ashi  fumasu na

      Akashite tohore

LXXXVII. (SECT CXLIII, NOTE 7.)

          Kimi   ga yuki

       Ke-nagaku   narinu

      Yama-tadzu   no

       Mukahe   wo yukamu

      Matsu ni ha matazhi

   LXXXVIII. (SECT. CXLIII, NOTE 8.)

          Komoaiku   no

       Hatsuse   no yama no

      Oho-wo   ni ha

       Hata   hari-date

      Sa-wo-wo   ni he

       Hata   hari-date

      Oho-wo   ni shi

       Naga   sadameru

      Omohi-dzuma ahare

      Tsuku-yumi   no

       Koyaru   koyari mo

      Adzusa-yumi

       Tateri-tateri   mo

      Nochi motori-miru

      Omohi-dzuma ahare

   (There is no footnote reference for  --JBH)

LXXXIX. (SECT. CXLIII, NOTE 9.)

          Komoriku   no

       Hatsuse   no kaha no [p. A22]

      Kami   tsu se ni

       I-kuhi   wo uchi

      Shimo   tsu se ni

       Ma-kuhi   wo uchi

      I-kuhi   ni ha

       Kagami   wo kake

      Ma-kuhi   ni ha

       Ma-tama   wo kake

      Ma-tama   nasu

       Aga   mofu imo

      Kagami   nasu

       Aga   mofu tsuma

      Ari to ihaba koso ni

      Ihe   ni mo yukame

       Kuni   wo mo shinubame

XC. (SECT. CLIII, NOTE 4.)

          Kusa-kabe   no

       Kochi   no yoma to

         Tatami-komo

       Heguri   no yama no

      Kochi-gochi   no

       Yama   no kahi ni

      Tachi-zakayuru

       Ha-biro   kuma-kashi

      Moto   ni ha

       I-kumi-dake   ohi

      Suwe-he   ni ha

       Tashimi-dake   ohi

      I-kumi-dake

       I-kumi   ha nezu

      Tashimi-dake

       Tashi   ni ha wi-nezu

      Nochi   mo kumi-nemu

       Sono   omohi-dzuma

      Ahare

   XCI. (SECT. CLIV, NOTE 9.)

          Mimoro   no

       Itsu-kashi   ga moto

      Kashi   ga moto

       Yuyushiki   ka mo

      Kashi-hara-wotomo

   XCII. (SECT. CLIV, NOTE IO.)

          Hiketa   no

       Waka-kuru-su-bara

      Wakaku-he   ni

       Wi-nete-mashi   mono

      Oi ni keru ka mo

   [p. A23]

XCIII. (SECT. CLIV, NOTE I2.)

          Mimoro   ni

       Tsuku   ya tama-kaki

      Tsuki-amashi

       Ta   ni ka mo yoraumu

      Kami no miya-hito

   XCIV. (SECT. CLIV, NOTE 13.)

          Kusaka-ye   no

       Iri-ye   no hachisu

      Hana-bachisu

       Mi   no sakari-bito

      Tomoshiki ro ka mo

   XCV. (SECT. CLV, NOTE 3.)

          Agura   wi no

       Kami   no mi to mochi

      Hiku   koto ni

       Mahi   suru womina

      Tokyo-yo ni mo ka mo

   XCVI. (SECT. CLVI, NOTE 3.)

          Mi-yeshinu   no

       Womuro   ga take ni

      Shishi   fusu to

       Tare   zo oho-make ni mawosu

      Yasumishishi

       Wa   ga oho-kimi no

      Shishi   matsu to

       Agura   ni i-mashi

      Shiro-tahe   no

       Sode   ki-sonafu

      Ta-komura   ni

       Amu   kaki-tsuki

      So   no amu wo

       Akidzu   haya kuhi

      Kaku   no goto

       Na   ni ohamu to

      Sora-mitsu

       Yamato   no kuni wo

      Akidzu-shima tofu

XCVII. (SECT. CLVII, NOTE 4.)

          Yasumishishi

       Wa   ga oho-kimi no [p. A24]

      Asobashishi

       Shishi   no yami-shishi no

      Utaki   kashikomi

       Wa   ga nige-noborishi

      Ari-wo   no

       Hari-no-ki   no yeda

XCVIII. (SECT. CLIX, NOTE 3.)

          Wotome   no

       I-kakuru   woka wo

         Kana-suki mo

       I-hochi   mo ga mo

      Suki-banuru mono

   XCIX. (SECT. CLX, NOTE 4.)

          Makimuke   no

       Hishiro   no mi-ya ha

      Asa-hi   no

       Hi-deru   mi-ya

      Yufu-hi   no

       Hi-gakeru   mi-ya

      Take   no ne no

       Nedaru-mi-ya

      Ko   no ne no

       Ne-bafu   mi-ya

      Yahoniyoshi

       I-kidzuki   no mi-ya

      Ma-ki-saku

       Hi   no mi kado

      Nihi-nahe-ya   ni

       Ohi-dateru

      Momo-daru

       Tsuki   ga ye ha

      Ho   tsu ye ha

       Ame   wo oheri

      Naka   tsu ye ha

       Adzuma   wo oheri

      Shi   dzu ye ha

       Hina   wo oheri

      Ho   tsu ye no

       Ye   no ura-ba ha

      Naka   tsu ye ni

       Ochi-furabahe

      Naka   tsu ye no

       Ye   no ura-ba ha

      Shimo   tsu ye ni

       Ochi-furabahe

      Shi   dzu ye no

       Ye   no ura-ba ha [p. A25]

      Ari-ginu   no

       Mihe   no ko ga

      Sasagaseru

       Midzu-tama-uki   ni

      Ukishi   abura

       Ochi-nadzusahi

      Mina koworo-koworo ni

      Ko   shi mo

       Aya   ni kashikoshi

      Taka-hikaru

       Hi   no mi ko

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

C. (SECT. CLX, NOTE 5.)

          Yamato   no

       Kono   takechi ni

      Ko-dakaru

       Ichi   no tsukasa

      Nihi-nahe-ya   ni

       Ohi-dateru

      Habiro yo-tsu ma-tsubaki

      So   ga ha no

       Hirori-i-mashi

      So   no hana no

       Teri-i-masu

      Taka-hikaru

       Hi   no mi ko ni

      To-yo   mi ki

       Tate-matsurase

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

CI. (SECT. CLX, NOTE 6.)

          Momoshiki   no

       Oho-miya-hito   ha

      Udzura-tori

       Hire   tori-kakete

      Mana-bashira

       Wo   yuki-ahe

      Niha-suzume

       Uzu-sumari-wite

      Kefu   mo ka mo

       Saka   mi-dzuku-rashi

      Taka-hikaru

       Hi   no miya-hito

      Koto   no

       Katari-goto   mo

      Ko wo ba

   [p. A26]

CII. (SECT. CLXI, NOTE 2.)

          Mina-sosoku

       Omi   no wotome

      Ho-dari   torasu mo

       Ho-dari   tori

      Kataku   torase

       Shita-gataku

      Ya-gataku   torase

       Ho   dari torasu ko

   CIII. (SECT. CLXI, NOTE 4)

          Yasumishishi

       Wa   ga oho-kimi no

      Asa-to   ni ha

       I-yori-datashi

      Yufu-to   ni ha

       I-yori-datasu

      Waki-dzuki   ga

       Shita   no

      Ita   ni mo ga

       A   se wo

   366 CIV. (SECT CLXV, NOTES 8 AND 12 )

          Oho-miya   no

       Woto   tsu hata-de

      Sumi katabukeri

   CV. (SECT. NOTES 9 AND 12 )

          Oho-takumi

       Wojinami   koso

      Sumi katabukere

   CVI. (SECT. CLXV, NOTES IO AND I2.)

          Oho-kimi   no

       Kokoro   wo yurami

      Omi   no ko no

       Ya-he   no shiba-kaki

      Iri-tatazu ari

   CVII. (SECT. CLXV. NOTE 12.)

          Sh   ho-se no

       Na-wori   wo mireba

      Asobi-kuru

       Shibi   ga hata-de ni

      Tsuma tateri-miyu

   CVIII. (SECT. CLXV, NOTES I1 AND I2.)

          Oho-kimi   no

       Mi   ko no shiba-kaki [p. A27]

      Ya-fu-zhimari

       Shimari-motohoshi

      Kiremu   shiba-kaki

       Yakemu   shiba-kaki

CIX. (SECT. CLXV, NOTE 12.)

          Ofuwo   yo shi

       Shibi   tsuku ama yo

      Shi   ga areba

       Ura-kohoshiki-kemu

      Shibi tsuku ama

CX. (SECT. CLXVII, NOTE 10.)

          Asa-ji-hara

       Wo-dani   wo sugite

      Momo-dzutafu

       Nute   yuraku mo

      Oki-me kurashi mo

   CXI. (SECT. CLXVII, NOTE, 11.)

          Oki-me   mo ya

       Afumi   no Oki-me

      Asu   yori ha

       Mi-yama-gakurite

      Miyezu ka mo aramu


          Shi ga tsura no

       I-hahi motohori

      Motohorite

       Ne-naki tohedomo

      Koto mo   norasanu



          Koto nagushi we

       Kokoro-gushi we

      Ware wehi ni   keri.



          Watari-ze ni

       Tateru

      Adzusa-yumi

       Mo yumi

   and again at the end:

          I-kirazu zo kuru

       Adzusa-yumi

      Ma-yumi.



          Habiro

       Yutsuma-tsubaki.



          Wa ga mikahoshi

       Kumi ha

      Kadzuraki

       Taka-miya

      Wagihe no atari.


          Tare zo oho-mahe ni

       Mawosu,

   or thus with Mabuchi:

          Tare zo

       Oho-maye ni mawosu.

^A24:26 Motowori divides the lines of this Song thus:

          Yasumishishi

       Wa ga oho-kimi no

      Asobashishi

       Shishi no

      Yami-shishi no

       Utaki kashikomi

      Wa ga nike

       Noborishi

      Ari-wo no

       Hari no hi no yeda.



          Mina koworo

       Koworo ni


